
--- PAGE 1 ---
Institutional Order in Episodes of 
Autocratization
Yuko Sato, Martin Lundstedt, 
Kelly Morrison, Vanessa A. Boese,
Staﬀan I. Lindberg
Working Paper 
SERIES 2022:133
THE VARIETIES OF DEMOCRACY INSTITUTE 
October 2022

--- PAGE 2 ---
Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) is a unique approach to conceptualization and measurement 
of democracy. The headquarters – the V-Dem Institute – is based at the University of Gothenburg 
with 20 staff. The project includes a worldwide team with 5 Principal Investigators, 22 Project 
Managers, 3 3 Regional Managers, 1 34 Country Coordinators, Research Assistants, and 3, 700 
Country Experts. The V -Dem project is one of the largest ever social science research -oriented 
data collection programs. 
P
lease address comments and/or queries to: 
V-De
m Institute
Department of Political Science
University of Gothenburg
Sprängkullsgatan 19, Box 711
405 30 Gothenburg
Sweden
E-mail: contact@v-dem.net
V-Dem Working Papers are available in electronic format at https://www.v-dem.net
Copyright ©2022 by authors. All rights reserved. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Institutional Order in Episodes of Autocratization ∗†
Yuko Sato1, Martin Lundstedt 1, Kelly Morrison 2, Vanessa A. Boese 3, and
Staﬀan I. Lindberg 1
1V-Dem Institute, University of Gothenburg
2University of Tennessee, Knoxville
3Geschwister-Scholl-Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨ at M¨ unchen
October 2022
∗We presented previous version of this paper at the 2022 MPSA Annual Conference. We are grateful to
Hans Lueders and conference participants for their useful feedback.
†Corresponding author : Yuko Sato, yuko.sato@v-dem.net
F unding: We recognize support by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation to Wallenberg Academy Fellow
Staﬀan I. Lindberg, Grant 2018.0144; by European Research Council, Grant 724191, PI: Staﬀan I. Lindberg; as
well as by internal grants from the Vice- Chancellor’s oﬃce, the Dean of the College of Social Sciences, and the
Department of Political Science at University of Gothenburg. The computations of expert data were enabled
by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at National Supercomputer Centre, Link¨ oping
University, partially funded by the Swedish Research Council through grant agreement no. 2019/3-516.
--- PAGE 4 ---
Abstract
Are there patterns in the sequences of institutional change when democracies autocratize? If so,
are such patterns distinct for democracies that transition to authoritarianism versus those that
avert democratic breakdown? The Episodes of Regime Transformation (ERT) dataset provides
a global sample of all 69 autocratization episodes between 1900-2021. Using this data and pair-
wise domination analysis, we describe the general order of reforms in 31 variables which make
up diﬀerent types of accountability mechanisms constraining the government. Our ﬁndings
suggest that institutional decay starts with horizontal accountability, followed by declines in
diagonal accountability, and, ﬁnally, vertical accountability. This pattern becomes more appar-
ent in countries with low democratic stock and during the third wave of autocratization. This
study makes strong contributions to a growing academic literature on patterns of autocrati-
zation as well as initiatives among policymakers and practitioners to counteract autocratization.
Keywords: Autocratization, pathways to autocracy, ERT dataset, domination analysis
--- PAGE 5 ---
Introduction
The “third wave” of autocratization has become a major threat to democracies across the world (e.g.,
L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg, 2019; Boese, Lindberg, and L¨ uhrmann, 2021; Boese et al., 2021). With
growing concern over this trend, recent studies have developed conceptualizations of autocratization
(e.g., Bermeo, 2016; L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg, 2019; Waldner and Lust, 2018) and started investigating
the exogenous causes of democratic breakdown as well as the conditions that increase resilience to such
changes.1
One of the limitations of existing studies is that they rarely unpack the process of autocrati-
zation,2 or the order in which diﬀerent aspects of democracy regress. This omission is consequential
because the nature of the autocratization process itself may have causal eﬀects, by strengthening the
power of executives or by disorienting and disorganizing the opposition, for instance (Haggard and
Kaufman, 2021, p. 2). Further, policymakers would beneﬁt from greater clarity about how the process
of autocratization unfolds in order to recognize the warning signs of regression. This paper explores
three research questions regarding the process of autocratization: When democracies autocratize, are
there observable patterns in the sequence of institutional change? Are such conﬁgurations distinct for
democracies that transition to authoritarianism versus those that avert democratic breakdown? Do
such conﬁgurations vary by the underlying conditions of autocratizing countries?
As a point of departure, we examine Juan J. Linz’s classic study The Breakdown of Democratic
Regimes: Crisis, Breakdown, and Reequilibration (1978) and some recent contributions on the process
of democratic backsliding. While some claim that the process of autocratization is highly hetero-
geneous (e.g. Waldner and Lust, 2018), most contemporary processes of autocratization share one
commonality: “democracy rarely dies overnight” (L¨ uhrmann, 2021, p. 1017). The sequence of events
or the dynamics of the process that are observed across autocratization episodes may help explain the
mechanism of destabilization or overthrow of a democratic system (Linz, 1978). Drawing from recent
advances in the literature, we seek to identify how the order of change is associated with declines in
three types of democratic accountability: the extent to which governments are accountable to citizens
(vertical accountability), to state institutions (horizontal accountability), and to the media and civil
1For comprehensive reviews of such studies, see Waldner and Lust (2018) and Hyde (2020).
2In this paper, we use the word autocratization to refer to processes of decline in democratic institutions
that begins in democracies. Such processes are also referred to as democratic regression (e.g. Maerz et al., 2021)
or democratic backsliding (e.g. Bermeo, 2016).
2
--- PAGE 6 ---
society (diagonal accountability) (L¨ uhrmann, Marquardt, and Mechkova, 2020). We also hypothesize
that sequences diﬀer by previous democratic experience and across waves of autocratization.
We evaluate these theoretically driven sequences of autocratization using the Episodes of Regime
Transformation (ERT) dataset (Edgell et al., 2022), which provides a complete sample of all 69
autocratization episodes between 1900 and 2021. We use pairwise domination analysis—a method
adapted from evolutionary biology (Lindenfors, Krusell, and Lindberg, 2019; Lindenfors et al., 2018;
Edgell et al., 2021)—to generate descriptive analysis of the general order of regression in 31 variables
that make up the diﬀerent types of accountability in the Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) data (version
12) (Coppedge et al., 2022a).
Our results reveal several novel insights about the autocratization process. First, democracies
undergoing autocratization tend to follow a common pattern in the sequence of their anti-democratic
reforms: they ﬁrst reduce horizontal and diagonal accountability and, only later, vertical account-
ability. Second, this paper demonstrates that there are remarkably few diﬀerences in the sequence
of autocratization in episodes that result in democratic breakdown and those in which breakdown
is averted. However, we also demonstrate that autocratization episodes that begin with reforms to
reduce executive oversight, to weaken the legislative’s capacity to investigate, or to constrain the elec-
tion management body’s (EMB) autonomy early on in the process of autocratization typically result
in democratic breakdown. Third, the indicators of diagonal accountability tend to decline in the early
phase of the episode in countries with high levels of democratic stock. Finally, the analysis points to a
unique feature of the third wave of autocratization: the indicators of horizontal and vertical account-
ability are more likely to decline earlier in the autocratization process in the third wave compared
with the previous period.
The ﬁndings are of high relevance for academic knowledge about the process of autocratization
and its driving mechanisms. Our theoretical arguments, as well as empirical ﬁndings, advance our
understanding of the expected institutional order of autocratization. Our work also demonstrates
how (and whether) the sequence of autocratization varies with the outcome of each episode (either
democratic survival or breakdown) and the underlying conditions of autocratizing countries. More-
over, our study contributes to policymakers and practitioners seeking to counteract autocratization by
identifying early warning signs of democratic erosion. In particular, our empirical results suggest that
countries undergoing particular kinds of democratic erosion—in executive oversight, legislative inves-
3
--- PAGE 7 ---
tigative capacity, and EMB autonomy—in the early phase of autocratization episodes are especially
likely to experience democratic breakdown.
In the following sections, we ﬁrst deﬁne autocratization in democracies. Next, we review pre-
vious studies of autocratization to identify theoretically derived propositions about the sequence of
autocratization and underlying conditions that may shape autocratization processes. Thereafter, we
discuss the methodology for analyzing the institutional order of autocratization. Finally, we present
our empirical results and summarize the implications of our study.
Determinants of Autocratization
With the number of countries undergoing autocratization rising signiﬁcantly over the past two decades
(e.g., Boese et al., 2021; L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg, 2019), a series of studies have developed conceptu-
alizations of the phenomenon (e.g., Bermeo, 2016; Boese, Lindberg, and L¨ uhrmann, 2021; Cassani and
Tomini, 2020; Diamond, 2015; Levitsky and Ziblatt, 2018; L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg, 2019; Runciman,
2018; Waldner and Lust, 2018). Following L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg (2019), we deﬁne autocratization
as “substantial de-facto decline of core institutional requirements for electoral democracy” (1096).
Although autocratization as a concept encompasses declines starting at any level and in any type of
regime, this paper focuses on processes of autocratization starting in democracies. Those have two
possible outcomes: democratic breakdown and survival.
The existing literature investigates exogenous factors to explain democratic backsliding and
breakdown.3 This body of contributions can be roughly sorted into three areas. First set focuses on
how a country’s economic situation aﬀects the probability of democratic breakdown. One established
discussion and ﬁnding is that democracies become more resilient from the risk of breakdown if they
reach a certain level of income (e.g., Przeworski and Limongi, 1997; Boix and Stokes, 2003; Epstein
et al., 2006). Other studies indicate that positive economic growth is a key predictor of democratic
survival or regime stability (e.g., Bernhard, Reenock, and Nordstrom, 2003; Gasiorowski, 1995; Gates
et al., 2006). Another group of studies more speciﬁcally found that levels of inequality play a critical
role in destabilizing democratic regime (e.g., Alem´ an and Yang, 2011; Boix et al., 2003; Houle, 2009).
A second part of the literature suggests that actors, primarily political leaders and ruling parties,
play a critical role in the process of autocratization. Research in this vein argues that exogenous shocks
3The diﬀerence between “exogenous” and “endogenous” factors to explain democratic regression is further
conceptualized by Gerschewski (2021).
4
--- PAGE 8 ---
can result in increased mobilization of anti-democratic forces (e.g., Linz, 1978; Capoccia, 2005). The
strategic interaction of an anti-democratic opposition and the incumbent creates an opportunity for
autocratization. Other studies ﬁnd that once anti-pluralist parties are in power, they signiﬁcantly
weaken commitments to democratic institutions, procedures, and norms (e.g., Levitsky and Ziblatt,
2018). For example, L¨ uhrmann (2021) shows how anti-pluralist parties in government contribute to
decline in levels of democracy. 4
A third branch of the literature suggests that the magnitude of eﬀects of either of the above two
sets of factors are conditional on intervening variables. For example, some authors ﬁnd that the types
or strengths of democratic institutions are vital for the resilience of democracy. Institutional instability
is alternatively derived from presidential systems (Linz, 1990), weak party systems (Huntington, 2006),
party-system fractionalization (e.g., Mainwaring, Scully, et al., 1995), or the breakdown of a party
brand (Lupu, 2014). Another suggested conditioning factor is a country’s experience with democracy,
where more democratic “stock” is associated with a lower probability of breakdown (e.g., Svolik, 2015;
P´ erez-Li˜ n´ an and Mainwaring, 2013; Boese et al., 2021). Finally, a changing international environment
is suggested as a permitting condition for autocratic leaders to come to power. This worsening (for
prospects of democracy) environment may be due to the decline in Western linkages (Levitsky and Way,
2010), declining international support for democracy, or the weakening of international democracy
norms (Hyde, 2020).
In this paper, we do not seek to contest the wisdom of these important ﬁndings. Rather, we
focus on a novel aspect of autocratization: the process of autocratization. We examine the order in
which diﬀerent aspects of democracy decline during autocratization and what, if any, association exists
between the order of autocratization and the outcome of autocratization episodes (either democratic
breakdown or survival).
There are a few exceptions to the above literature that investigate the role that the sequence
of autocratization plays in explaining democratic breakdown and survival. One is L¨ uhrmann (2021)’s
ideal-typical autocratization sequence describing a process where an increase in citizens’ discontent
with democratic institutions and parties lays the groundwork for anti-pluralist parties rising to power.
In turn, these parties dismantle democratic institutions. Similarly, Haggard and Kaufman (2021) sug-
gest that rising levels of political polarization strengthen anti-system parties that proceed to instigate
antidemocratic reforms.
4See also L¨ uhrmann, Medzihorsky, and Lindberg (2021), who show the relationship between anti-pluralist
ruling parties and the onset of autocratization.
5
--- PAGE 9 ---
There are also a couple of descriptive, comparative case-studies examining the autocratization
process. Hellmeier et al. (2021) compare the eight most outstanding autocratizers between 2010 to
2020 and ﬁnd that the ruling government typically repress the media, academic freedoms, and civil
society before they attempts to reform formal institutions like the quality of elections. Laebens and
L¨ uhrmann (2021) analyze three autocratizers that avoided democratic breakdown and ﬁnd that ac-
countability mechanisms play a critical role in defending democratic institutions against anti-pluralist
leaders’ attempts to erode them. Such accountability mechanism includes parliamentary and judicial
oversight (horizontal accountability), pressures from civil society and the media (diagonal accountabil-
ity), and electoral competition between parties and within parties (vertical accountability) (L¨ uhrmann,
Marquardt, and Mechkova, 2020). The study thus suggests the importance of focusing on account-
ability mechanisms to understand how institutional change itself creates an opportunity for further
autocratization.
Still, we do not have a comprehensive analysis of patterns of institutional decay during auto-
cratization. We thus do not yet know if there is any speciﬁc sequence found across autocratization
episodes or whether speciﬁc sequences inﬂuence the likelihood of democratic breakdown or survival.
And ﬁnally, we do not yet know whether such sequences vary by the underlying conditions of auto-
cratizing countries. These are the issues this paper addresses. The following section therefore looks
closely at the process of autocratization to identify theoretical expectations regarding these questions.
In line with recent literature, such as Laebens and L¨ uhrmann (2021), we describe the decline in the
diﬀerent dimensions of accountability that constrain political leaders to proceed with autocratization.
The Sequence of Democratic Breakdown
In his canonical work, The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Crisis, Breakdown, and Reequilibration,
Juan J. Linz details autocratization processes across a wide range of cases to identify generally impor-
tant sequences of events. In so doing, Linz (1978) provides a descriptive model of common patterns
that lead to democratic breakdown. In this section, we condense Linz’s depiction into three sequential
processes: (1) the emergence of anti-democratic movements, coupled with an increase in violence and
repression, (2) aggrandizement of the executive, and (3) dismantling of democratic institutions. We
then discuss how these developments are associated with declines in the diﬀerent aspects of democratic
accountability.
6
--- PAGE 10 ---
Emergence of Anti-Democratic Movements: Erosion of Diagonal Ac-
countability
Linz (1978) ﬁnds that autocratization episodes typically start with a crisis of legitimacy for democ-
racy. Such crises often emerge when anti-democratic groups 5 become active in society and question
democratic regimes. The anti-democratic forces can be political parties, movements, or organizations
that “explicitly reject political systems based on the existence of the authority of the state or any
central authority with coercive powers” (Linz, 1978, p. 28). The rise of anti-democratic groups in
the opposition may be due to various causes, such as widespread revolutionary movements from the
left, economic crisis or stagnation, anti-neoliberal policies or immigration trends. Despite the het-
erogeneity of causes, Linz (1978) argues that we tend to observe increased political violence, various
conspiracies, and even failed coups and unsuccessful revolutionary attempts during this early stage of
autocratization, extending the legitimacy crisis of democratic regimes.
Such mounting citizen discontent with democratic regimes is not unique to the period that Linz
(1978) observes. Recent studies also ﬁnd that declining support for democratic norms and parties is
an early driver of the autocratization process (L¨ uhrmann, 2021). 6 Speciﬁcally, a decline of trust in
government institutions leads to a reduction in vote share for established parties, opening a window of
opportunity for outsider parties (often anti-pluralists) to grow (Petrarca, Giebler, and Weßels, 2022).
Violent repression against anti-democratic forces tends to lead to escalation and contribute to
further mobilization (Linz, 1978, p. 57). However, the government often counters anti-democratic
mobilization by “accepting limits on the civil liberties for the sake of stabilizing the situation and
ensuring the survival of the system” (Linz, 1978, p. 90), while it signiﬁcantly erodes the regime
legitimacy. Thus, “militant democracy” — the use of legal restrictions on political expression or
participation to curb extremist actors in democratic regimes 7 — plays a critical role in the early
process of autocratization (Capoccia, 2013). In this scenario, autocratization sequences tend to begin
with violent attacks by the anti-democratic forces, followed by the democratic incumbent’s attempts
to restrict citizens’ rights or even to use repression against anti-democratic forces. To prevent an
escalation of the conﬂict, the government also seeks more control over information by censoring the
media. Accordingly, we are likely to observe erosion in non-institutional democratic constraints in the
ﬁrst phase of institutional decay, namely those associated with diagonal accountability.
5Linz (1978) calls such actors the “disloyal opposition” to the democratic regime.
6L¨ uhrmann (2021) especially highlights that contemporary autocratizers typically come to power through
popular vote, not military coups, which gives citizens a vital role in autocratization processes.
7The term originally introduced by Karl Lowenstein (1937).
7
--- PAGE 11 ---
Executive Aggrandizement: Erosion of Horizontal Accountability
The second phase Linz (1978) identiﬁes as leading towards breakdown is an executive enlargement
or “aggrandizement (Bermeo, 2016),” which the current literature typically refers to as weakening of
horizontal accountability. In this second phase, increased public support for anti-democratic forces
ﬁrst translates into the emergence of “anti-pluralist parties.” Once these parties increase their presence
in the parliament, the government typically faces growing diﬃculty in ensuring coalition support and
reaching a consensus in any policy area (Linz, 1978, p. 66). This type of political crisis opens up for
political leadership to propose constitutional amendments, grant emergency powers, suspend sessions
of the legislature, intervene, suspend or interfere with regional or local governments, and/or reshuﬄe
the top-level military command in order for the government to take all “necessary” decisions (Linz,
1978, pp. 69–71).
Moreover, the government’s use of violence against undemocratic forces is often legitimized
through the legal process. The judiciary deals leniently with the government as they feel sympathetic
to the motives of the government agencies engaging in violence or hostility rather than their victims
(Linz, 1978, p. 57). Thus, judicial decision tend to land in favor of the government.
Recent studies especially highlight that the conﬂict within the government becomes salient once
the polarization between anti- and pro-democratic forces at the elite levels elevates (McCoy, Rahman,
and Somer, 2018; Somer, McCoy, and Luke, 2021). Polarization may create an opportunity for the
government to justify changes to concentrate its power in both the judiciary (i.e., assigning judges in
favor of the government) and the legislature (i.e., creating a new legislature with the majority seats
taken by the ruling parties) by portraying the opposition as threatening (Haggard and Kaufman,
2021, p. 2). Such increased polarization and the aggrandizement of the executive are observed in both
scenarios: pro-democratic incumbent facing the increasing inﬂuence by anti-democratic oppositions or
anti-democratic forces in power with pro-democratic oppositions resisting the government. The ﬁrst
scenario includes the early phase of classic episodes, like the rise of Fascism in the Weimar Republic or
the military uprising in Spain in 1936. Later includes the contemporary autocratization episodes like
Hungary or Turkey, where the elected anti-pluralists strategically used polarization to strengthen the
concentration of power in the executive. This concentration of power is equivalent to what is typically
referred to and can be observed empirically as an erosion of horizontal accountability.
8
--- PAGE 12 ---
Approaching Democratic Breakdown: Erosion of Vertical Account-
ability
Linz (1978, pp. 81–82) sketches ﬁve scenarios for the last stage. The ﬁrst scenario leading to breakdown
is the unconstitutional displacement of a democratically elected government by a military coup. In
the second scenario, the anti-democratic government incorporates part of the political class of the
previous democratic regime (often professional politicians). Such regimes form royal dictatorships
with a military-bureaucratic character.
The third alternative is that the democratic government is terminated without a successful
power transition, resulting in civil war. A fourth option is the establishment of a (non-military)
authoritarian regime excluding all leading political actors of the preceding democratic regime that
lacks any form of mass mobilization in support of its rule.
The ﬁnal scenario Linz (1978) portrays is that well-organized anti-democratic forces with a mass
base in society take over the democratic government. According to Linz (1978), typical cases of this
pattern are the Fascists in Italy and Germany. However, this scenario also parallels much of the recent
literature suggesting that democratically elected authoritarian-minded leaders typically head gradual
institutional decays leading to the breakdown of democracy (e.g., Bermeo, 2016; L¨ uhrmann and Lind-
berg, 2019; Waldner and Lust, 2018). This includes more overt violations of the democratic procedure
such as manipulating election results, keeping opposition candidates oﬀ the ballot, hampering voter
registration, or packing the electoral commission.
In any of the scenarios above, the observable implications are signiﬁcant declines in the quality
of core democratic institutions that are typically thought to ensure vertical accountability.
In sum, and following the theoretical intuitions from Linz (1978)’s work, we expect to see the
institutional order of autocratization as Figure 1 presents.
Figure 1. Expected Sequence of Autocratization
The main hypothesis we seek to evaluate is:
9
--- PAGE 13 ---
H1: Autocratization starts with declines in diagonal accountability, followed by declining horizontal
accountability, and ﬁnally declines in vertical accountability.
Linz (1978) does not provide any expectations about whether these sequences are likely to diﬀer
by the outcome of autocratization episodes: democratic breakdown or survival. The underlying as-
sumption is that the survival cases do not experience a decline in all three accountability mechanisms.
In particular, in cases where democracy survives, the autocratization process should stop before lead-
ers signiﬁcantly erode vertical accountability mechanisms. Accordingly, observable autocratization
processes should be the same in cases of both democratic breakdown and survival, with cases of sur-
vival stopping short of the last phases of autocratization. Ultimately, it is an open empirical question
whether there are diﬀerences between autocratization processes in cases that survive and cases that
ultimately break down. We examine these diﬀerences in our analysis.
Expectations From Sample Heterogeneity
In addition to the expectations derived from Linz (1978)’s theory of democratic regime breakdown,
there are reasons to formulate at least two theoretical propositions based on expected sample hetero-
geneity. Among others, Waldner and Lust (2018) noted that the sample of autocratization episodes is
highly heterogeneous. Sample heterogeneity is typically a clue to varying background vulnerabilities
that can shift the extent to which cases are susceptible to probabilistic causes of autocratization. Based
on the existing literature, two factors seem particularly salient to shift underlying vulnerabilities to
processes of democratic breakdown: previous democratic experience and the wave of autocratization.
Length of Previous Democratic Experience
There is an established ﬁnding in the literature that new democracies are more vulnerable to breakdown
compared to established democracies (e.g., Svolik, 2015; Boese et al., 2021). Arguments about the
origin of democratic resilience vary, but they generally propose that resilience has to do with reinforcing
mechanisms. Some argue that particular institutions, such as party systems deeply rooted in society
(Linz, 1978) or judicial processes that require a bold procedures for changing constitutions (P´ erez-
Li˜ n´ an and Mainwaring, 2013; Reenock, Staton, and Radean, 2013; Ginsburg and Huq, 2018; Weyland,
2020), create bulwarks that make it diﬃcult for the ruling government to derail democratic institutions.
10
--- PAGE 14 ---
Other arguments suggest that the iteration of elections builds incentives for actors to accept the
rules of the game (Lindberg, 2006) and that the everyday experience of living under democracy
promotes democratic attitudes (Fuchs-Sch¨ undeln and Sch¨ undeln, 2015). Regardless, the expected
outcome is that a longer experience with democracy should be associated with greater resilience to
the government’s attempts that violate democratic norms (e.g., Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2016;
Persson and Tabellini, 2009).
Accordingly, we expect that formal democratic institutions in countries with longer democratic
experiences are more resilient to autocratization. We therefore intuit that, in such cases, the govern-
ment is especially likely to target non-institutional constraints represented by diagonal accountability
before attempting to change formal institutions. In H1, we hypothesized that the general order of
autocratization would tend to start with the decline of diagonal accountability. However, if we com-
pare the cases with high and low democratic experiences, we expect to ﬁnd that elements of diagonal
accountability are more likely to decline earlier in the process in the cases with high democratic
experience compared to the cases with limited democratic experience.
Thus, the second hypothesis follows below:
H2: In countries with high democratic stock, it is more likely that autocratization will begin with
declines in diagonal accountability compared to countries with low democratic stock.
Waves of Autocratization
A growing body of literature distinguishes between diﬀerent waves of autocratization, similar to Hunt-
ington’s (1993) formulation of waves of democratization. 8 One consistent ﬁnding in this research is
that episodes of autocratization in the ﬁrst (roughly 1920s to 1940s) and second (roughly 1960s into
1970s) waves were often swift processes dominated by coups, the installation of one-party regimes, and
foreign invasions (L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg, 2019). The current, third wave of autocratization (be-
ginning around 1994) is instead characterized by gradual processes where (often elected) incumbents
undermine democratic institutions one step at a time (e.g., Bermeo, 2016; Haggard and Kaufman,
2021; L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg, 2019).
8L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg (2019, p. 1102) deﬁnes an autocratization wave as “the time period during which
the number of countries undergoing democratization declines while at the same time autocratization aﬀects
more and more countries.”
11
--- PAGE 15 ---
One prominent characteristic of the third wave of autocratization is that their autocratization
processes tend to start once anti-pluralist parties are elected as heads of government, while the earlier
waves are likely to start when democratic-incumbent represses anti-democratic movements. This
diﬀerence may come from the characteristics of these “anti-pluralist” forces in the third wave. In
the contemporary period, anti-pluralists tend not to position themselves as “anti-democratic” or use
violent tactics at the beginning of their movement. For example, Hugo Ch´ avez and the populist
leaders emulated his strategies, like Evo Morales in Bolivia and Rafael Correa in Ecuador, came into
power by actively advocating a superior model of democracy. Such movements were even endorsed
by prominent politicians and journalists (Hawkins, 2016). Since the contemporary anti-pluralists are
not always seen as a serious threat to the democratic regime (Kaltwasser and Taggart, 2016), they are
allowed to take oﬃce without facing repression. This means that the ﬁrst phase of the general order of
autocratization (decline in diagonal accountability) is likely to be skipped. Once anti-pluralists come
into power, they immediately implement several reforms that fragment democratic constraints.
The decline in the diagonal accountability may, however, also be observed in the third wave of
autocratization in the later stage of the process. Once anti-pluralist leaders enter the oﬃce, they tend
to repress civil society groups or media that vocally oppose the government (e.g., Hellmeier et al.,
2021; Mechkova, L¨ uhrmann, and Lindberg, 2017). One expected diﬀerence between the pre-third
wave and during the third wave is that the decline in horizontal accountability is likely to be observed
before the decline in diagonal accountability. Thus, we expect that for autocratization episodes in the
third wave, the sequence of institutional decay is more likely to start from the decline of horizontal
accountability:
H3: In the third wave, autocratization sequences are more likely to start with declines in horizontal
accountability compared to the ﬁrst and second waves.
Lastly, we consider the variation in the order of the institutional decay during the third wave
of autocratization. We expect anti-pluralist incumbents to start anti-democratic reforms immediately
after they are in power. However, as we discussed in the previous section, if the resilience of democratic
institutions is high, they are likely to target non-institutional accountability mechanisms ﬁrst before
eroding the formal institutional constraints or horizontal accountability. Thus, if we compare the
episodes with high and low democratic experiences during the third wave, we expect to ﬁnd that
12
--- PAGE 16 ---
elements of diagonal accountability are more likely to decline earlier in the process in the cases with
high democratic experience compared to the cases with limited democratic experience.
Thus, the last hypothesis follows below:
H4: During the third wave of autocratization, autocratization sequences in countries with high demo-
cratic stock are more likely to start with declines in diagonal accountability compared to countries
with low democratic stock.
Research Design
The sample consists of episodes of autocratization starting in countries classiﬁed as democracies from
the Episodes of Regime Transformation(ERT) dataset (version 4.0) (Edgell et al., 2022). The ERT
builds on L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg (2019) in deﬁning autocratization episodes as periods of substantial
and sustained decline of democratic attributes and similarly uses the Electoral Democracy Index (EDI)
from the V-Dem dataset (version 12) (Coppedge et al., 2022a). However, the group behind the ERT
has developed a more sophisticated operationalization of autocratization episodes. 9
To measure the decline of diﬀerent aspects of democratic attributes, we use indicators forming
three accountability indices developed by L¨ uhrmann, Marquardt, and Mechkova (2020). These indices
measure diagonal accountability with 13 indicators, horizontal accountability with 7 indicators, and
vertical accountability with 11 indicators (see Table A3 of the Appendix for all indicators). 10 These
indicators also overlap with the critical components of the electoral and liberal democracy indices. 11
Accordingly, the accountability indicators also capture the essential elements of democracy.
The ERT contains 69 completed episodes of autocratization in democracies from 1900 to 2021
(see Appendix Table A1 for a complete list of cases). Another 12 episodes of autocratization were
ongoing (censored) by the end of 2021 and are therefore omitted from our analysis. The ERT also codes
the outcome of each episode, which allows us to evaluate if the order of institutional change is diﬀerent
9See Maerz et al. (2021) for details. While autocratization episodes include cases where autocratization
started from electoral or closed autocracy, we only include episodes starting in democracies.
10Given our interest in the temporal ordering of reforms, we omit the elected oﬃcials’ index, variables for
whether the legislature questions oﬃcials in practice, whether the legislature is bicameral, and internet censor-
ship from the original indicators introduced by L¨ uhrmann, Marquardt, and Mechkova (2020) in our analysis.
These variables all exhibit limited within-country variation in our sample.
1111 indicators are from the EDI, including the component indices for suﬀrage, clean elections, freedom of
expression, or association. 8 indicators are from the Liberal Democracy Index (LDI), including the component
indices for equality before the law and individual liberty, judicial and legislative constraints on the executive.
13
--- PAGE 17 ---
in countries that averted breakdown and stayed democratic and those that ended as autocracies. Of
the 69 autocratization episodes, 62 resulted in a democratic breakdown while only 7 survived. We
do not expect the general order of decline in accountability to vary by the outcome of each episode.
However, we compare the institutional order across the two outcome categories (democratic breakdown
and survival) to evaluate whether we ﬁnd novel insights about the relationship between the sequence
and outcome of autocratization.
To evaluate the second hypothesis, we compare cases with relatively longer and shorter previous
democratic experiences. For this analysis we draw on a recently developed measure of democratic stock
(Edgell et al., 2020). 12 To avoid concerns about endogeneity, we divide the sample based on the level
of democratic stock at the start of each episode. We do not have a theory of what counts as “high” or
“suﬃcient” democratic experience. Therefore, we consider episodes with democratic stock below the
sample average to have low democratic stock and episodes with stock above the average to have high
democratic stock.
To evaluate the third hypothesis, we compare the episodes before and during the third wave
of autocratization. We take the delimitation identiﬁed by L¨ uhrmann and Lindberg (2019) where the
third wave began in 1994.
Lastly, to evaluate the fourth hypothesis, we compare episodes during the third wave with low
democratic stock and those with high democratic stock. The list of countries by waves and the level
of democratic stock is in Table A2 of the Appendix.
Empirical Approach
To determine the order of institutional decay during autocratization episodes, we use pairwise dom-
ination analysis, a methodology which explores the temporal relationship between ordinal variables
developed by Lindenfors, Krusell, and Lindberg (2019) and Lindenfors et al. (2018). The method has
been adapted from evolutionary biology, and it compares pairs of ordinal indicators to assess which are
dominant within the overall indicators of interest (in this case, the indicators measuring democratic
accountability). The interpretation and visualizations of the results were further developed by Edgell
12The stock measure oﬀers calculations based on any democracy index. Since our theory proposes that strong
judicial constraints make political leaders less likely to be able to erode democratic institutions, we use the
stock measure based on the LDI, which includes indicators for judicial constraints on the executive. Due to the
missing data for the democratic stock, 9 cases are dropped from this part of the analysis.
14
--- PAGE 18 ---
et al. (2021), who used it to analyze the order of institutional change in episodes of liberalization. We
adopt their approach here and apply it to episodes of autocratization.
By deﬁnition, we expect to observe that indicators generally move from higher to lower values
during the process of autocratization. Thus, we infer that a domination indicator , whose value is
greater than the paired indicator over the observation period, declines later in the autocratization
episode compared with the indicators it dominates. Using the R package seqR (Krussell, 2017), we
compare the observed values of all unique pairs of the 31 selected ordinal indicators measuring the
three types of accountability. We then sum the number of indicators that an indicator dominates
(d) or is dominated by (r), which compose a domination table. To aid with interpretation, following
Edgell et al. (2021), we also calculate a domination score based on the diﬀerence in these two values
(score = r−d), with lower values indicating that the variable dominates many other variables and thus
declines later in the autocratization process. Then, we use this score to illustrate the general order
of institutional decay as well as to test similarities in these scores across diﬀerent episode outcomes
(survival vs. breakdown) and underlying conditions (high vs. low democratic stock or pre-third wave
vs. third wave) with a simple bivariate linear regression. We also use their residuals to ﬁnd the
variables that deviate from this trend across episodes.
This empirical approach requires some important assumptions. First, similar to Edgell et al.
(2021), we assume that 50 percent is substantial enough to constitute domination. Since we aim to
identify the most common path(s) of autocratization, we highlight those relationships that occur a
majority of the time over the episodes. In addition, empirically, the 50 per cent threshold establishes
a clear pattern of dominance. For a given pair of ordinal indicators, X and Y , when X > Y more
than 50 per cent of the time, it is rarely the case that X < Y more than 20 per cent of the time
because X = Y is also a common pattern. We also show that our main conclusions are robust when
we increase the domination threshold to two-thirds of the observations (see Table A13 - A15).
Second, because the same kind of process can play out quickly in one country and slowly in
another, the method does not consider the time elapsed between institutional changes. The methodol-
ogy achieves this by collapsing duplicate country-year observations, when values of all 31 variables are
constant, into a single observed ‘state.’ This approach resolves the problem that stable states could
overwhelm changes in terms of numbers in a country-year matrix. We report comparable results using
country-year data in Appendix (Tables A10 - A12).
15
--- PAGE 19 ---
Third, the method requires the ordinal scale to be consistent between observations on the
same indicator (Lindenfors, Krusell, and Lindberg, 2019; Lindenfors et al., 2018). The V-Dem data
largely satisﬁes this assumption as the project’s extensive work has been addressing diﬀerential item
functioning of expert rating using various tools (Marquardt et al., 2018; Marquardt and Pemstein,
2018; Pemstein et al., 2022).
Fourth, the ordinal scales between indicators should be comparable. An ordinal level on one
indicator should correspond to the same level on all other indicators in the analysis (e.g., ordinal level
1 should correspond to a 1 on everything else). This implies that the indicators should have the same
observable ranges and level of measurement. For this reason and following Edgell et al. (2021), we
rescaled 6 variables relating to media and civic participation (by min/max) and suﬀrage (by quintiles)
into V-Dem’s standard 0-4 ordinal scale for comparability.
Finally, the analysis here does not account for exogenous variables, such as economic recession,
pandemics, migration crisis, that may aﬀect the course of autocratization. While we are aware of
importance of such exogenous conditions, we rather focus on the process of internal reform in this
study. This is because such internal processes have not received suﬃcient attention in previous studies
and these processes are likely to inﬂuence how policymakers respond to ongoing changes in democratic
regimes. However, we recognize that unobserved confounders may at least partly drive the results of
our domination analyses.
Results
Figure 2 shows the general order of institutional decay in the full sample of episodes based on the
domination scores for the indicators of the three accountability indices. Higher values of the score
suggest that the indicator declined earlier in the autocratization process, while lower values of the
score mean that the indicator declined later in the process. The ﬁgure demonstrates the average
values of domination score for the indicators of each accountability index and the 99% conﬁdence
limits obtained by the basic nonparametric bootstrap.
For the full sample of episodes, horizontal accountability has the largest average domination
score, indicating that it tends to be an earlier decliner across all autocratization episodes. Then,
diagonal accountability has the second-largest score. Therefore, the most common institutional order
of change tends to be (1) horizontal accountability, (2) diagonal accountability, and (3) vertical ac-
16
--- PAGE 20 ---
countability. This partly contradicts H1, which suggested that institutional decay would most often
start from diagonal accountability but also proposed that vertical accountability would be the last
category to decline.
Second, Figure 3 demonstrates the diﬀerence in the domination scores for the indicators of three
accountability indices across diﬀerent categories of episodes. For example, we subtract the domination
scores for each indicator in the breakdown episodes from the scores in the survival episodes. If the
diﬀerence is 0, the order is the same in both categories of episodes. But if the diﬀerence is negative,
the score is larger for breakdown cases meaning that the decline of the indicator happens earlier in
the breakdown episodes compared with survival cases. If the diﬀerence is positive, then the score is
smaller for breakdown cases meaning that the decline of the indicator happens later in the breakdown
episodes compared with survival cases.
First, the institutional order of autocratization in episodes that lead to democratic survival
yields a slight diﬀerence from the breakdown episodes (Figure 3, upper left). The score for horizontal
accountability is lower in the survival episodes. This indicates that, on average, the decline of horizon-
tal accountability is more often coming later in the episodes leading to democratic survival compared
with the breakdown episodes. The upper-right panel in Figure 3 shows that the institutional order
of autocratization episodes yields several diﬀerences depending on democratic stock. The diﬀerence
in the domination score for diagonal accountability is positive, indicating that the score for diagonal
accountability is higher in the episodes with high democratic stock. Thus, the decline in diagonal
accountability happens earlier in episodes taking place in countries with high democratic stock. This
is in accordance with our theoretical expectation: autocratization sequences are likely to start with
declines in diagonal accountability if levels of democratic stock are high (H2). In addition, compared
to the episodes with low democratic stock, horizontal accountability declines at later stages in the
episodes with longer democratic experience.
The results also show that the order of institutional decay tends to vary depending on the wave
of autocratization (Figure 3, lower-left panel). The scores for vertical and horizontal accountability are
higher in the episodes in the third wave. This indicates that both horizontal and vertical accountability
tend to decline earlier for the episodes of the third wave compared with the episodes before the third
wave. Meanwhile, the indicators of diagonal accountability on average tend to decline later in the
third wave compared with episodes before it. This is in accordance with our theoretical expectations
in H3.
17
--- PAGE 21 ---
Figure 2. Order of Institutional Decay in Autocratization Episodes
Diagonal Accountability
Horizontal Accountability
Vertical Accountability
−30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30
Domination Score (Later to Early) for Entire Episodes
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution of domination scores for indicators in each of the three accountability
indices in entire episodes and the 99% conﬁdence limits. The indicators with lower scores decline later in the
autocratization process while the indicators with higher scores decline earlier in the process.
Lastly, the lower-right panel in Figure 3 shows that, the institutional order slightly diﬀers by
the democratic stock during the third wave of autocratization. The direction of the diﬀerence is
consistent with the upper-right panel comparing the order by democratic stock for the entire sample.
The diﬀerence in the domination score for diagonal accountability is positive, indicating that the
decline in diagonal accountability happens earlier in episodes taking place in countries with high
democratic stock during the third wave. This is in accordance with our theoretical expectation in H4.
Figure A3 in Appendix further shows the distribution of the average ﬁrst values of indicators
for three accountability mechanisms. An absence of substantial diﬀerence in the ﬁrst values between
waves indicates that the observed diﬀerence in the institutional order is not derived from the initial
conditions of the autocratization episodes by waves. In addition, the ﬁrst values for diagonal account-
ability indicators are, on average, larger in the third wave than before. It indicates that diagonal
accountability tends to decline later in the third wave, not because they declined before the autocra-
tization episode starts. But it is because the order of institutional decay is diﬀerent in the third wave
of autocratization.
Breakdown and Survival in Detail
Next, we further analyze the institutional order of autocratization by focusing on the indicators that
compose the three accountability mechanisms. First, Figure 4 plots the domination scores for each
18
--- PAGE 22 ---
Figure 3. Diﬀerence in Order of Institutional Decay by Episode Outcome, Democratic Stock,
and Wave
Diagonal Accountability
Horizontal Accountability
Vertical Accountability
−20 −10 0 10 20
Difference in Scores for Survival and Breakdown Episodes
Diagonal Accountability
Horizontal Accountability
Vertical Accountability
−20 −10 0 10 20
Difference in Scores for High and Low Democratic Stock
Diagonal Accountability
Horizontal Accountability
Vertical Accountability
−20 −10 0 10 20
Difference in Scores for Third Wave and Pre−Third Wave
Diagonal Accountability
Horizontal Accountability
Vertical Accountability
−20 −10 0 10 20
Difference in Scores for High and Low Democratic Stock in Third Wave
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution of the diﬀerence in domination scores of the indicators in the three
accountability indices across diﬀerent categories of episodes and the 99% conﬁdence limits. A score of 0 means
that there is no diﬀerence in the institutional order between the categories.
of the 31 indicators, comparing episodes with a democratic breakdown (horizontal axis) to those that
survived the autocratization process (vertical axis). Indicators developing comparatively earlier or
later for both outcomes appear in the upper-right and the lower-left quadrants, respectively. The
shaded area represents the estimated 99 percent conﬁdence interval from a bivariate linear regression
between domination scores for survival and breakdown episodes. For example, the indicator for suﬀrage
is almost on the estimated line of the lower-left quadrant, meaning that suﬀrage declines in the end of
the autocratization process in both survival or breakdown episodes. “Freedom of discussion for men,”
on the other hand, falls outside of the conﬁdence intervals, meaning it declines rather early in episodes
that have experienced a democratic breakdown compared with episodes that have survived.
This ﬁgure yields three additional and novel insights about the institutional order of autocra-
tization. First, the results reveal a remarkable consistency in the ordering of reforms during autoc-
ratization, regardless of its outcome. The ﬁtted linear regression shows a strong correlation between
domination scores for the episodes that resulted in democratic breakdown or survival, with a coeﬃcient
of 0.88 ( p < 0.01) and an adjusted R2 of 0.79 (Model 1, Table A8).
Second, we demonstrate that some variables distinguish episodes that lead to breakdown from
ones that survive. They are the ones with the greatest and statistically signiﬁcant deviations from the
regression diagonal. Notably, executive oversight by the legislature, legislature investigates in practice,
19
--- PAGE 23 ---
Figure 4. Pairwise Domination Scores in Autocratization Episodes by Episode Outcome
Suffrage
Elections multiparty
Barriers to parties
Party ban
Opposition parties autonomy
Print/broadcast media perspectives
Election voter registry
Election government intimidation
Election free and fair
CSO participatory environment
Print/broadcast media critical
EMB capacity
Freedom of discussion for men
Freedom of discussion for women
CSO repression
Media bias
EMB autonomy
CSO entry and exit
Compliance with high court
Compliance with judiciary
Lower court independence
Executive respects constitution
Election other voting irregularities
High court independence
Government censorship effort −−− Media
Legislature investigates in practice
Engaged society
Harassment of journalists
Executive oversight
Later Earlier
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
Later
Earlier
−30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30
Democratic Breakdown
Democratic Survival
Diagonal Accountability Horizontal Accountability Vertical Accountability
and EMB autonomy decline relatively earlier in democracies that eventually break down (upper-right
quadrant).13 This seems to indicate that democratic breakdown depends on incumbents that can
swiftly derail safeguards of democracy that provide counter-balancing power to the executive and
guarantee independent election administration. Meanwhile, election free and fair and print/broadcast
media critical decline relatively earlier in the survival cases (upper-left quadrant). 14
Democratic Stock in Detail
Figure 5 again plots the domination scores for all the 31 indicators but now compares episodes with low
democratic stock (horizontal axis) to those with high democratic stock (vertical axis). Similar to the
13Executive oversight ( e = −11.35), legislature investigates in practice ( e = −7.70), and EMB autonomy
(e = −7.42) have the highest residual values (Table A9).
14Election free and fair ( e = 12.73) and print/broadcast media critical ( e = 10.31).
20
--- PAGE 24 ---
ﬁrst model comparing the outcomes of the episode, we ﬁnd the strong similarities in the autocratization
process across episodes with low and high democratic experiences. 15
However, there is a notable diﬀerence in the institutional order of decay between the episodes
with high and low democratic stock. The variables making up diagonal accountability, such as gov-
ernment censorship eﬀort, freedom of academic and cultural expression, CSO repression, and freedom
of discussion for men and women, decline earlier in episodes with high democratic stock compared
to episodes with low democratic stock (see also Table A9). 16 Meanwhile, the variables relating to
horizontal and vertical accountability decline relatively early in the cases with low democratic stock.
These variables include high court independence (horizontal accountability), election other voting
irregularity (vertical accountability), and EMB autonomy (vertical accountability). 17
Thus, the results reveal that institutional decay is likely to start with the erosion of diagonal
accountability in the episodes with high democratic stock, while it is likely to start with the erosion
of horizontal and vertical accountability in the episodes with limited democratic experience. These
results corroborate the underlying theoretical intuitions for H2. If an incumbent wants to derail
democracy in a country with a long history of democracy, where institutions of horizontal checks and
balances and electoral integrity are strong, he would probably do best to begin by attacking more
“vulnerable” aspects of democracy, such as civil society, academic freedom, and media freedom.
Waves of Autocratization in Detail
Figure 6 plots the domination scores comparing episodes in the pre-third wave of autocratization
(horizontal axis) to those in the third wave (vertical axis). The results conﬁrm the general consistency
in the ordering of democratic regression across the waves of autocratization. 18
There is also a notable diﬀerence in the institutional order of decay between the two subsets of
episodes. The variables composing horizontal and vertical accountability decline relatively earlier in the
third wave of autocratization compared to previous waves.19 Meanwhile, the variables associated with
15The regression coeﬃcient is 0.92 ( p < 0.01) and an adjusted R2 of 0.81 (Model 2, Table A8).
16Freedom of academic and cultural expression ( e = 13 .00), CSO repression ( e = 10 .55), and freedom of
discussion for men and women (both e = 8.62) (Table A9).
17Election voter registry (e = −14.45), election other voting irregularities ( e = −10.49), election free and fair
(e = −12.30), and EMB capacity ( e = −8.08).
18The regression coeﬃcient is 0.88 ( p < 0.01) and the adjusted R2 is 0.77 (Model 3, Table A8).
19Election other voting irregularities ( e = 16.00), high court independence ( e = 13.59), lower court indepen-
dence (e = 12.47), and executive respects constitution ( e = 10.82) (Table A9).
21
--- PAGE 25 ---
Figure 5. Pairwise Domination Scores in Autocratization Episodes by Democratic Stock
Suffrage
Elections multiparty
Barriers to parties
Party ban
Print/broadcast media perspectives
Opposition parties autonomy
Election government intimidation
CSO participatory environment
CSO repression
Election voter registry
Print/broadcast media critical
Freedom of discussion for men
Freedom of discussion for women
Election free and fair
EMB capacity
Media bias
Freedom of academic and cultural expression
CSO entry and exit
Media self−censorship
EMB autonomy
Compliance with high court
Compliance with judiciary
Executive respects constitution
Government censorship effort −−− Media
High court independence
Lower court independence
Executive oversight
Engaged society
Election other voting irregularities
Legislature investigates in practice
Harassment of journalists
Later Earlier
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
Later
Earlier
−30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30
Low Democratic Stock
High Democratic Stock
Diagonal Accountability Horizontal Accountability Vertical Accountability
diagonal accountability, including Print/broadcast media perspectives, CSO entry and exit, freedom of
academic and cultural expression, declined earlier in the pre-third wave compared to the third wave.20
These results indicate that the erosion of horizontal accountability (and certain aspects of ver-
tical accountability) happens earlier during the third wave of autocratization than in the pre-third
wave period. This ﬁnding is in accordance with our expectations in H3: in the third wave, autoc-
ratization sequences are especially likely to start with declines in horizontal accountability. Further,
the erosion of diagonal accountability happens later in the third wave of autocratization compared
with before. This result may suggest that anti-pluralists tend to come to power without facing re-
pression during contemporary autocratization episodes. However, once in oﬃce, anti-pluralists almost
immediately reduce executive constraints by the legislature and judiciary. Only later do they repress
20Print/broadcast media perspectives (e = −10.82), CSO entry and exit (e = −9.23), and freedom of academic
and cultural expression ( e = −8.47).
22
--- PAGE 26 ---
Figure 6. Pairwise Domination Scores in Autocratization Episodes by Wave
Suffrage
Elections multiparty
Barriers to parties
Election voter registry
Opposition parties autonomy
Election government intimidation
Party ban
Election free and fair
Print/broadcast media perspectives
CSO participatory environment EMB capacity
Print/broadcast media critical
Election other voting irregularities
Freedom of discussion for men
Media self−censorship
CSO repression
EMB autonomy
Freedom of discussion for women
Compliance with high court
Lower court independence
High court independence
Media bias
Compliance with judiciary
Executive respects constitution
Freedom of academic and cultural expression
CSO entry and exit
Legislature investigates in practice
Government censorship effort −−− Media
Engaged society
Executive oversight
Harassment of journalists
Later Earlier
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
Later
Earlier
−30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30
Before the Third Wave of Autocratization
Third Wave of Autocratization
Diagonal Accountability Horizontal Accountability Vertical Accountability
non-institutional actors and reform electoral procedures. 21 Such ﬁndings align with previous research
showing that democratic resilience is substantially weaker in the third wave of autocratization (Boese
et al., 2021).
Conclusion
In this article, we examined the order of institutional changes that characterize autocratization. Pre-
vious studies evaluated the factors that inﬂuence the onset of autocratization episodes or democratic
breakdown. However, past research has rarely unpacked the process of autocratization: the order in
which diﬀerent aspects of democracy decline. To address this gap, we revisit existing theories capturing
21The detailed analysis comparing the episodes among the third wave of autocratization (high vs. low demo-
cratic stock) is not included because the sample size is very small (N= 35), and it has limited capacity to make
a general implication.
23
--- PAGE 27 ---
observable patterns of democratic breakdown and analyze the autocratization process in a systematic
way. We utilize new data on autocratization episodes and a unique methodological approach, pairwise
domination analysis, to understand the order in which autocratization processes unfold.
Our research yields several important insights. We ﬁrst ﬁnd that autocratization generally
follows a common pattern: aspects of horizontal and diagonal accountability decline ﬁrst, followed
by declines in vertical accountability. However, we also ﬁnd that democratic breakdown is espe-
cially common when executive oversight, legislature investigation, or EMB autonomy decline early in
the autocratization process. These ﬁndings generate two plausible inferences. First, the substantial
similarity in the patterns of reforms could suggest that exogenous factors may matter more than insti-
tutional ordering when explaining the outcomes of autocratization. Alternatively, our ﬁndings could
mean that minimal changes in the sequence of reforms have substantive eﬀects on the propensity for
democratic breakdown. For example, democratic breakdown is especially common when incumbents
swiftly reduce checks on the executive and guarantees for independent electoral administration. If the
latter inference holds, earlier reforms to executive oversight, legislative investigations, and EMB may
provide essential warning signs about the trajectory of autocratization.
Our empirical results also indicate that underlying conditions in autocratizing countries yield
diﬀerent sequences of autocratization, each of which may be more or less vulnerable to democratic
breakdown. First, in episodes with high democratic stock, institutional decay tends to start with the
erosion of diagonal accountability. In contrast, the level of judicial constraints or EMB autonomy
tends to decline earlier in countries with low democratic stock. These empirical ﬁndings suggest
that leaders in countries with solid democratic institutions start their anti-democratic reforms with
more vulnerable institutions, such as those protecting the rights of civil society, academics, and the
media. Second, our ﬁndings show that the decline of horizontal and vertical accountability tends to
be observed in the earlier phase during the third wave of autocratization. In detail, the erosion of high
court independence and/or election irregularities happens earlier during the third wave compared with
episodes observed before. Such ﬁndings may corroborate studies that stress the erosion of democratic
institutions as a central characteristic found in the third wave of autocratization (e.g., Bermeo, 2016).
Future research needs to examine whether these diﬀerences in ordering by the diﬀerent outcomes
or underlying conditions are causal and whether they hold up to models accounting for exogenous
forces. Our research using the domination analysis provides a starting point to study independent
eﬀects of the order of the autocratic reform on the course of the autocratization process.
24
--- PAGE 28 ---
References
Alem´ an, Jos´ e and David D Yang (2011). “A duration analysis of democratic transitions and
authoritarian backslides”. In: Comparative Political Studies 44.9, pp. 1123–1151.
Bermeo, Nancy G (2016). “On democratic backsliding”. In: Journal of Democracy 27.1, pp. 5–
19.
Bernhard, Michael, Christopher Reenock, and Timothy Nordstrom (2003). “Economic perfor-
mance and survival in new democracies: Is there a honeymoon eﬀect?” In: Comparative
Political Studies 36.4, pp. 404–431.
Boese, Vanessa A, Amanda B Edgell, Sebastian Hellmeier, Seraphine F Maerz, and Staﬀan I
Lindberg (2021). “How democracies prevail: democratic resilience as a two-stage process”.
In: Democratization 5.28, pp. 885–907.
Boese, Vanessa A, Staﬀan I Lindberg, and Anna L¨ uhrmann (2021). “Waves of autocratization
and democratization: a rejoinder”. In: Democratization 6.28, pp. 1202–1210.
Boix, Carles and Susan C Stokes (2003). “Endogenous democratization”. In: World politics
55.4, pp. 517–549.
Boix, Carles et al. (2003). Democracy and redistribution. Cambridge University Press.
Capoccia, Giovanni (2005). Defending democracy: Reactions to extremism in interwar Europe .
JHU Press.
— (2013). “Militant democracy: The institutional bases of democratic self-preservation”. In:
Annual Review of Law and Social Science 9, pp. 207–226.
Cassani, Andrea and Luca Tomini (2020). “Reversing regimes and concepts: from democrati-
zation to autocratization”. In: European Political Science 19.2, pp. 272–287.
Coppedge, Michael, John Gerring, Carl Henrik Knutsen, Staﬀan I. Lindberg, Jan Teorell, Nazifa
Alizada, David Altman, Michael Bernhard, Agnes Cornell, M. Steven Fish, Lisa Gastaldi,
Haakon Gjerløw, Adam Glynn, Sandra Grahn, Allen Hicken, Garry Hindle, Nina Ilchenko,
Katrin Kinzelbach, Joshua Krusell, Kyle L. Marquardt, Kelly McMann, Valeriya Mechkova,
Juraj Medzihorsky, Pamela Paxton, Daniel Pemstein, Joseﬁne Pernes, Oskar Ryd /acute.ts1en, Jo-
hannes von R¨ omer, Brigitte Seim, Rachel Sigman, Svend-Erik Skaaning, Jeﬀrey Staton, Ak-
sel Sundstr¨ om, Eitan Tzelgov, Yi-ting Wang, Tore Wig, Steven Wilson, and Daniel Ziblatt
(2022a). V-Dem Country-Year Dataset v12 . doi: https://doi.org/10.23696/vdemds22.
Coppedge, Michael, John Gerring, Carl Henrik Knutsen, Staﬀan I Lindberg, Jan Teorell, Kyle
L Marquardt, Juraj Medzihorsky, Daniel Pemstein, Nazifa Alizada, Lisa Gastaldi, Garry
Hindle, Joseﬁne Pernes, Johannes von R¨ omer, Eitan Tzelgov, Yi-ting Wang, and Steven
Wilson (2022b). V-Dem Codebook v12 . Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) Project.
Diamond, Larry (2015). “Facing up to the democratic recession”. In: Journal of Democracy
26.1, pp. 141–155.
Edgell, Amanda B, Vanessa A Boese, Seraphine F Maerz, Patrik Lindenfors, and Staﬀan I
Lindberg (2021). “The Institutional Order of Liberalization”. In: British Journal of Political
Science 3.52, pp. 1465–1471.
Edgell, Amanda B., Seraphine F. Maerz, Laura Maxwell, Richard Morgan, Juraj Medzihorsky,
Matthew C. Wilson, Vanessa A. Boese, Sebastian Hellmeier, Jean Lachapelle, Patrik Linden-
fors, Anna L¨ uhrmann, and Staﬀan I. Lindberg (2022).Episodes of Regime Transformation
Dataset, v4 . url: https://github.com/vdeminstitute/ERT.
Edgell, Amanda B, Matthew C Wilson, Vanessa A Boese, and Sandra Grahn (2020). “Demo-
cratic legacies: using democratic stock to assess norms, growth, and regime trajectories”.
In: V-Dem Working Paper 100.
25
--- PAGE 29 ---
Epstein, David L, Robert Bates, Jack Goldstone, Ida Kristensen, and Sharyn O’Halloran (2006).
“Democratic transitions”. In: American journal of political science 50.3, pp. 551–569.
Fuchs-Sch¨ undeln, Nicola and Matthias Sch¨ undeln (2015). “On the endogeneity of political
preferences: Evidence from individual experience with democracy”. In: Science 347.6226,
pp. 1145–1148.
Gasiorowski, Mark J (1995). “Economic crisis and political regime change: An event history
analysis”. In: American political science review 89.4, pp. 882–897.
Gates, Scott, H˚ avard Hegre, Mark P Jones, and H˚ avard Strand (2006). “Institutional incon-
sistency and political instability: Polity duration, 1800–2000”. In: American Journal of
Political Science 50.4, pp. 893–908.
Gerschewski, Johannes (2021). “Erosion or decay? Conceptualizing causes and mechanisms of
democratic regression”. In: Democratization 28.1, pp. 43–62.
Ginsburg, Tom and Aziz Z Huq (2018). “How to save a constitutional democracy”. In: How to
Save a Constitutional Democracy . University of Chicago Press.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2016). “Long-term persistence”. In: Journal
of the European Economic Association 14.6, pp. 1401–1436.
Haggard, Stephan and Robert Kaufman (2021). Backsliding: Democratic Regress in the Con-
temporary World. Cambridge University Press.
Hawkins, Kirk A (2016). “Responding to radical populism: Chavismo in Venezuela”. In: De-
mocratization 23.2, pp. 242–262.
Hellmeier, Sebastian, Rowan Cole, Sandra Grahn, Palina Kolvani, Jean Lachapelle, Anna
L¨ uhrmann, Seraphine F Maerz, Shreeya Pillai, and Staﬀan I Lindberg (2021). “State of
the world 2020: autocratization turns viral”. In: Democratization 6.28, pp. 1053–1074.
Houle, Christian (2009). “Inequality and democracy: Why inequality harms consolidation but
does not aﬀect democratization”. In: World politics 61.4, pp. 589–622.
Huntington, Samuel P (1993). The third wave: Democratization in the late twentieth century .
Vol. 4. University of Oklahoma press.
— (2006). Political order in changing societies . Yale University Press.
Hyde, Susan D (2020). “Democracy’s backsliding in the international environment”. In:Science
369.6508, pp. 1192–1196.
Kaltwasser, Crist´ obal Rovira and Paul Taggart (2016). “Dealing with populists in government:
a framework for analysis”. In: Democratization 23.2, pp. 201–220.
Krussell, Joshua (2017). SeqR: Ordinal Sequence Analysis, v0.1.0. url: https://github.com/
jsks/seqR.
Laebens, Melis G and Anna L¨ uhrmann (2021). “What halts democratic erosion? The changing
role of accountability”. In: Democratization 5.28, pp. 908–928.
Levitsky, Steven and Lucan A Way (2010). Competitive authoritarianism: Hybrid regimes after
the Cold War . Cambridge University Press.
Levitsky, Steven and Daniel Ziblatt (2018). How democracies die . Broadway Books.
Lindberg, Staﬀan I. (2006). Democracy and elections in Africa. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lindenfors, Patrik, Fredrik Jansson, Yi-ting Wang, and Staﬀan I Lindberg (2018). “Investi-
gating sequences in ordinal data: A new approach with adapted evolutionary models”. In:
Political Science Research and Methods 6.3, pp. 449–466.
Lindenfors, Patrik, Joshua Krusell, and Staﬀan I Lindberg (2019). “Sequential Requisites Anal-
ysis: A New Method for Analyzing Sequential Relationships in Ordinal Data”. In: Social
science quarterly 100.3, pp. 838–856.
Linz, Juan J. (1978). The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Crisis, Breakdown and Re-
equilibration. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press.
26
--- PAGE 30 ---
Linz, Juan J (1990). “The perils of presidentialism”. In: Journal of democracy 1.1, pp. 51–69.
Loewenstein, Karl (1937). “Militant democracy and fundamental rights”. In:American Political
Science Review 31.3, pp. 417–432.
L¨ uhrmann, Anna (2021). “Disrupting the autocratization sequence: towards democratic re-
silience”. In: Democratization 28.5, pp. 1017–1039.
L¨ uhrmann, Anna and Staﬀan I Lindberg (2019). “A third wave of autocratization is here: what
is new about it?” In: Democratization 26.7, pp. 1095–1113.
L¨ uhrmann, Anna, Kyle L Marquardt, and Valeriya Mechkova (2020). “Constraining govern-
ments: New indices of vertical, horizontal, and diagonal accountability”. In: American Po-
litical Science Review 114.3, pp. 811–820.
L¨ uhrmann, Anna, Juraj Medzihorsky, and Staﬀan I Lindberg (2021). “Walking the Talk: How
to Identify Anti-Pluralist Parties”. In: V-Dem Working Paper 116.
Lupu, Noam (2014). “Brand dilution and the breakdown of political parties in Latin America”.
In: World Politics 66.4, pp. 561–602.
Maerz, Seraphine F, Amanda Edgell, Matthew C Wilson, Sebastian Hellmeier, and Staﬀan I
Lindberg (2021). “A framework for understanding regime transformation: introducing the
ERT dataset”. In: V-Dem Working Paper 113.
Mainwaring, Scott, Timothy Scully, et al. (1995). Building democratic institutions: Party sys-
tems in Latin America . Stanford University Press Stanford.
Marquardt, Kyle L and Daniel Pemstein (2018). “IRT models for expert-coded panel data”.
In: Political Analysis 26.4, pp. 431–456.
Marquardt, Kyle L, Daniel Pemstein, Brigitte Seim, and Yi-ting Wang (2018). “What makes
experts reliable?” In: V-Dem Working Paper 68.
McCoy, Jennifer, Tahmina Rahman, and Murat Somer (2018). “Polarization and the global cri-
sis of democracy: Common patterns, dynamics, and pernicious consequences for democratic
polities”. In: American Behavioral Scientist 62.1, pp. 16–42.
Mechkova, Valeriya, Anna L¨ uhrmann, and Staﬀan I Lindberg (2017). “How much democratic
backsliding?” In: Journal of Democracy 28.4, pp. 162–169.
Pemstein, Daniel, Kyle L. Marquardt, Eitan Tzelgov, Yi-ting Wang, Juraj Medzihorsky, Joshua
Krusell, Farhad Miri, and Johannes von R¨ omer (2022). “The V–Dem Measurement Model:
Latent Variable Analysis for Cross-National and Cross-Temporal Expert-Coded Data”. In:
V-Dem Working Paper 21, 7th edition.
P´ erez-Li˜ n´ an, An´ ıbal and Scott Mainwaring (2013). “Regime legacies and levels of democracy:
evidence from Latin America”. In: Comparative Politics 45.4, pp. 379–397.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2009). “Democratic capital: The nexus of political and
economic change”. In: American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1.2, pp. 88–126.
Petrarca, Constanza Sanhueza, Heiko Giebler, and Bernhard Weßels (2022). “Support for insider
parties: The role of political trust in a longitudinal-comparative perspective”. In: Party
Politics 28.2, pp. 329–341.
Przeworski, Adam and Fernando Limongi (1997). “Modernization: Theories and facts”. In:
World politics 49.2, pp. 155–183.
Reenock, Christopher, Jeﬀrey K Staton, and Marius Radean (2013). “Legal institutions and
democratic survival”. In: The Journal of Politics 75.2, pp. 491–505.
Runciman, David (2018). How democracy ends . Proﬁle Books.
Somer, Murat, Jennifer L. McCoy, and Russell E. Luke (2021). “Pernicious polarization, auto-
cratization and opposition strategies”. In: Democratization 28.5, pp. 929–948.
27
--- PAGE 31 ---
Svolik, Milan W (2015). “Which democracies will last? Coups, incumbent takeovers, and the
dynamic of democratic consolidation”. In: British Journal of Political Science 45.4, pp. 715–
738.
Waldner, David and Ellen Lust (2018). “Unwelcome change: Coming to terms with democratic
backsliding”. In: Annual Review of Political Science 21, pp. 93–113.
Weyland, Kurt (2020). “Populism’s threat to democracy: Comparative lessons for the United
States”. In: Perspectives on Politics 18.2, pp. 389–406.
28
--- PAGE 32 ---
Appendix
Table A1. List of the Autocratization Episodes (1900-2021)
Country Start End Outcome
1 Argentina 1930 1931 Democratic breakdown
2 Argentina 1966 1967 Democratic breakdown
3 Armenia 1993 2008 Democratic breakdown
4 Austria 1931 1938 Democratic breakdown
5 Bangladesh 2002 2007 Democratic breakdown
6 Belarus 1995 2001 Democratic breakdown
7 Belgium 1914 1915 Democratic breakdown
8 Belgium 1940 1941 Democratic breakdown
9 Benin 2018 2021 Democratic breakdown
10 Bolivia 2006 2020 Democratic breakdown
11 Burkina Faso 2014 2015 Democratic breakdown
12 Chile 1972 1974 Democratic breakdown
13 Czech Republic 1930 1940 Democratic breakdown
14 Denmark 1940 1944 Democratic breakdown
15 Ecuador 2007 2013 Averted regression
16 El Salvador 2015 2021 Democratic breakdown
17 Estonia 1932 1935 Democratic breakdown
18 Estonia 1991 1992 Democratic breakdown
19 Fiji 1987 1988 Democratic breakdown
20 Fiji 2000 2001 Democratic breakdown
21 France 1939 1941 Democratic breakdown
22 France 1965 1965 Averted regression
23 Germany 1923 1939 Democratic breakdown
24 Honduras 2006 2010 Democratic breakdown
25 Hungary 2010 2021 Democratic breakdown
26 India 1971 1975 Preempted democrtic breakdown
27 India 2000 2021 Democratic breakdown
28 Ivory Coast 2019 2021 Democratic breakdown
29 Latvia 1934 1939 Democratic breakdown
30 Lesotho 2015 2017 Averted regression
31 Lithuania 1924 1927 Democratic breakdown
32 Luxembourg 1940 1941 Democratic breakdown
33 Madagascar 1997 2002 Democratic breakdown
34 Malawi 1999 2004 Democratic breakdown
35 Maldives 2012 2016 Democratic breakdown
36 Mali 2007 2012 Democratic breakdown
37 Mali 2017 2021 Democratic breakdown
38 Malta 1958 1959 Democratic breakdown
39 Moldova 1998 2006 Democratic breakdown
40 Moldova 2012 2017 Averted regression
41 Netherlands 1940 1941 Democratic breakdown
42 Nicaragua 2006 2021 Democratic breakdown
43 Niger 1996 1996 Democratic breakdown
44 Niger 2009 2010 Democratic breakdown
Continued on next page
i
--- PAGE 33 ---
Table A1 – Continued from previous page
45 North Macedonia 2000 2000 Preempted democrtic breakdown
46 North Macedonia 2005 2012 Democratic breakdown
47 Norway 1940 1943 Democratic breakdown
48 Palestine/West Bank 2006 2008 Democratic breakdown
49 Papua New Guinea 2007 2013 Democratic breakdown
50 Peru 1990 1992 Democratic breakdown
51 Philippines 2001 2005 Democratic breakdown
52 Philippines 2016 2021 Democratic breakdown
53 Poland 1926 1931 Democratic breakdown
54 Serbia 2010 2021 Democratic breakdown
55 Solomon Islands 2000 2001 Democratic breakdown
56 South Korea 2008 2014 Averted regression
57 Spain 1936 1940 Democratic breakdown
58 Sri Lanka 1970 1982 Democratic breakdown
59 Sri Lanka 2004 2006 Democratic breakdown
60 Suriname 1980 1981 Democratic breakdown
61 Thailand 2005 2007 Democratic breakdown
62 Turkey 1980 1981 Democratic breakdown
63 Turkey 2005 2021 Democratic breakdown
64 Ukraine 1997 2004 Democratic breakdown
65 Ukraine 2010 2014 Democratic breakdown
66 Uruguay 1933 1934 Democratic breakdown
67 Uruguay 1963 1974 Democratic breakdown
68 Venezuela 1998 2007 Democratic breakdown
69 Zambia 2010 2019 Democratic breakdown
Notes: To be considered sustained and substantial, the default ERT data requires that the EDI decrease by at
least 0.01 in the initial year and by at least 0.10 (10 percent of the total scale) throughout the episode (Maerz
et al., 2021). Episodes terminate due to prolonged (5-year) periods of stasis, any substantial one-year (0.03)
or ﬁve-year (0.10) improves, or a transition to electoral autocracy. Survival encompasses two sub-categories in
the ERT data: averted regression and preempted democratic breakdown. We do not distinguish between these
sub-categories in the analysis given that the number of episodes in which democracy survives is so small. Recent
autocratization cases, including Brazil and Poland, are considered censored (or unﬁnished) cases.
ii
--- PAGE 34 ---
Figure A1. The three waves of autocratization (1900-2021)
1. Wave 2. Wave 3. Wave
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
Number of Countries
Autocratization
Autocratization in (former) democracies
Democratization
Figure A2. Distribution of democratic stock in autocratization episodes (1900-2021)
0
2
4
6
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Democracy Stock
count
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution of the starting values of democratic stock based on the LDI (scaled by
0-1) among autocratization episodes. The mean value is 0.21.
iii
--- PAGE 35 ---
Table A2. Autocratization Episodes by Conditions
Before the Third Wave During the Third Wave
(1900-1993) (1994-2021)
Belgium (1914-1915) Benin (2018-2021)
Belgium (1940-1941) Ecuador (2007-2013)
Chile (1972-1974) Fiji (2000-2001)
Denmark (1940-1944) India (2000-2021)
Fiji (1987-1988) Papua New Guinea (2007-2013)
High France (1939-1941) Philippines (2001-2005)
Democratic Stock France (1965-1965) Philippines (2016-2021)
Luxembourg (1940-1941) Solomon Islands (2000-2001)
Malta (1958-1959) Sri Lanka (2004-2006)
Netherlands (1940-1941) Venezuela (1998-2007)
Norway (1940-1943)
Sri Lanka (1970-1982)
Suriname (1980-1981)
Uruguay (1933-1934)
Uruguay (1963-1974)
Armenia (1993-2008) Bangladesh (2002-2007)
Estonia (1932-1935) Belarus (1995-2001)
Estonia (1991-1992) Bolivia (2006-2020)
Germany (1923-1939) Burkina Faso (2014-2015)
India (1971-1975) Ivory Coast (2019-2021)
Latvia (1934-1939) Lesotho (2015-2017)
Lithuania (1924-1927) Madagascar (1997-2002)
Poland (1926-1931) Malawi (1999-2004)
Spain (1936-1940) Maldives (2012-2016)
Turkey (1980-1981) Mali (2007-2012)
Mali (2017-2021)
Moldova (1998-2006)
Moldova (2012-2017)
Nicaragua (2006-2021)
Low Niger (1996-1996)
Democratic Stock Niger (2009-2010)
North Macedonia (2000-2000)
North Macedonia (2005-2012)
Serbia (2010-2021)
South Korea (2008-2014)
Thailand (2005-2007)
Turkey (2005-2021)
Ukraine (1997-2004)
Ukraine (2010-2014)
Zambia (2010-2019)
Notes: 9 cases are not included as the information about democratic stock is missing.
iv
--- PAGE 36 ---
Figure A3. Distribution of the average ﬁrst values of three accountability’s indicators by
pre-third wave and third wave of autocratization episodes
0 1 2 3 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
Diagonal Accountability
count
0 1 2 3 4
Horizontal Accountability
Pre−Third WaveThird Wave
0 1 2 3 4
Vertical Accountability
v
--- PAGE 37 ---
Table A3. Summary statistics of indicators
Collapsed states Country-year
Indicator Variable Index Obs Mean SD Obs Mean SD
1 CSO repression v2csreprss ord Diagonal Accountability 204 2.91 0.84 258 2.97 0.81
2 CSO entry and exit v2cseeorgs ord Diagonal Accountability 204 2.67 0.80 258 2.74 0.78
3 CSO participatory environment v2csprtcpt ord Diagonal Accountability 204 3.05 1.04 258 3.14 1.01
4 Engaged society v2dlengage ord Diagonal Accountability 204 2.16 0.66 258 2.23 0.65
5 Freedom of discussion for men v2cldiscm ord Diagonal Accountability 204 3.05 0.83 258 3.10 0.79
6 Freedom of discussion for women v2cldiscw ord Diagonal Accountability 204 2.98 0.71 258 3.03 0.68
7 Freedom of academic and cultural expression v2clacfreeord Diagonal Accountability 204 2.72 0.75 258 2.79 0.74
8 Media self-censorship v2meslfcen ord Diagonal Accountability 204 2.89 0.86 258 2.95 0.79
9 Harassment of journalists v2meharjrn ord Diagonal Accountability 204 2.13 0.56 258 2.14 0.53
10 Media bias v2mebias ord Diagonal Accountability 203 2.99 0.65 257 3.04 0.62
11 Print/broadcast media critical v2mecrit ord Diagonal Accountability 204 3.14 0.71 258 3.20 0.68
12 Government censorship eﬀort — Media v2mecenefmord Diagonal Accountability 204 2.32 0.97 258 2.41 0.94
13 Print/broadcast media perspectives v2merange ord Diagonal Accountability 204 3.45 0.81 258 3.53 0.76
14 Compliance with judiciary v2jucomp ord Horizontal Accountability 204 2.60 0.75 258 2.64 0.72
15 Compliance with high court v2juhccomp ord Horizontal Accountability 204 2.74 0.67 258 2.77 0.64
16 High court independence v2juhcind ord Horizontal Accountability 204 2.37 0.90 258 2.41 0.87
17 Lower court independence v2juncind ord Horizontal Accountability 204 2.45 0.82 258 2.50 0.80
18 Legislature investigates in practice v2lginvstp ord Horizontal Accountability 202 2.14 0.95 256 2.15 0.92
19 Executive oversight v2lgotovst ord Horizontal Accountability 201 2.06 0.93 255 2.08 0.92
20 Executive respects constitution v2exrescon ord Horizontal Accountability 204 2.53 0.63 258 2.58 0.60
21 EMB autonomy v2elembaut ord Vertical Accountability 204 2.73 0.89 258 2.78 0.84
22 EMB capacity v2elembcap ord Vertical Accountability 204 3.04 0.74 258 3.11 0.73
23 Election voter registry v2elrgstry ord Vertical Accountability 204 3.46 0.68 258 3.49 0.64
24 Election other voting irregularities v2elirreg ord Vertical Accountability 204 2.53 0.90 258 2.56 0.88
25 Election free and fair v2elfrfair ord Vertical Accountability 204 3.29 0.72 258 3.34 0.68
26 Election government intimidation v2elintim ord Vertical Accountability 204 3.44 0.59 258 3.48 0.57
27 Elections multiparty v2elmulpar ord Vertical Accountability 204 3.94 0.37 258 3.95 0.33
28 Suﬀrage e v2xsuﬀr5C Vertical Accountability 204 3.95 0.31 258 3.96 0.28
29 Party ban v2psparban ord Vertical Accountability 204 3.80 0.57 258 3.84 0.52
30 Barriers to parties v2psbars ord Vertical Accountability 204 3.81 0.61 258 3.85 0.55
31 Opposition parties autonomy v2psoppaut ord Vertical Accountability 204 3.59 0.61 258 3.63 0.58
Notes: Range for all variables is 0-4. The range for the following variables have been rescaled from their original 0-3 or 0-5 (engaged society) ordinal scale by division:
media critical (v2mecritord), media perspectives (v2merangeord), media self-censorship (v2meslf cenord), CSO participatory environment (v2csprtcptord), and
engaged society (v2dlengageord). Suﬀrage (e v2x suf f r5C) has been rescaled from 0-1 proportion quintiles to a 0-4 range by multiplication. The following election-
speciﬁc variables have been carried forward within the electoral regime (v2 elecreg): v2elmulparord, v2elrgstryord, v2elvotbuyord, v2elirregord, v2elintimord.
Given our interest in the temporal ordering of reforms, we omit variables exhibit limited within-country variation in our sample from the original indicators by
L¨ uhrmann, Marquardt, and Mechkova (2020). Further, the variables for elected head of the executive (v2exelechos) and legislature questions oﬃcials in practice
(v2lgqstexp) are both variables measured as 1 (yes) or 0 (no), which makes it diﬃcult to see incremental changes. Legislature bicameral (v2lgbicam) has an alternative
response of 2 (having multiple legislatures), but these values are not ordered. The data for internet censorship (v2mecenef i) is only available after 2000. See Coppedge
et al. (2022b) for the detail.
vi
--- PAGE 38 ---
Table A4. Domination table for Figure 3 and 4 (outcome)
Breakdown Survival
Indicator Index d r score d r score
Executive oversight Horizontal Accountability 0 23 23 2 11 9
Engaged society Diagonal Accountability 0 22 22 0 27 27
Harassment of journalists Diagonal Accountability 0 22 22 0 29 29
Legislature investigates in practice Horizontal Accountability 0 20 20 2 12 10
Government censorship eﬀort — Media Diagonal Accountability 0 17 17 1 13 12
High court independence Horizontal Accountability 0 14 14 1 14 13
Election other voting irregularities Vertical Accountability 1 14 13 2 9 7
Lower court independence Horizontal Accountability 1 13 12 2 12 10
Executive respects constitution Horizontal Accountability 0 12 12 2 12 10
Compliance with judiciary Horizontal Accountability 3 11 8 2 11 9
CSO entry and exit Diagonal Accountability 3 9 6 2 9 7
Compliance with high court Horizontal Accountability 3 9 6 2 11 9
Freedom of academic and cultural expression Diagonal Accountability 4 9 5 2 8 6
EMB autonomy Vertical Accountability 4 9 5 8 5 -3
Freedom of discussion for women Diagonal Accountability 6 6 0 7 4 -3
CSO repression Diagonal Accountability 6 6 0 2 8 6
Media bias Diagonal Accountability 5 5 0 2 8 6
Freedom of discussion for men Diagonal Accountability 7 6 -1 18 0 -18
Media self-censorship Diagonal Accountability 7 5 -2 2 8 6
EMB capacity Vertical Accountability 8 5 -3 7 6 -1
CSO participatory environment Diagonal Accountability 10 4 -6 10 4 -6
Print/broadcast media critical Diagonal Accountability 10 4 -6 3 8 5
Election free and fair Vertical Accountability 14 3 -11 3 6 3
Election government intimidation Vertical Accountability 14 1 -13 10 6 -4
Election voter registry Vertical Accountability 14 0 -14 17 0 -17
Print/broadcast media perspectives Diagonal Accountability 17 0 -17 20 0 -20
Opposition parties autonomy Vertical Accountability 20 0 -20 20 0 -20
Party ban Vertical Accountability 22 0 -22 23 0 -23
Elections multiparty Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 23 0 -23
Barriers to parties Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 23 0 -23
Suﬀrage Vertical Accountability 24 0 -24 23 0 -23
Notes: Results from pairwise domination analysis of collapsed “states” in episodes of autocratizing democracy, disaggregated
by outcome type. Statistics: d= number of indicators dominated; r =number of indicators dominated by; score= domination
score (d-r). Results are sorted from low to high on domination score for episodes with democratic breakdown. Unit of analysis
is the collapsed state.
vii
--- PAGE 39 ---
Table A5. Domination table for Figure 3 and 5 (democracy stock)
High Stock Low Stock
Indicator Index d r score d r score
Harassment of journalists Diagonal Accountability 0 27 27 0 22 22
Engaged society Diagonal Accountability 0 24 24 0 20 20
Executive oversight Horizontal Accountability 0 21 21 0 19 19
Legislature investigates in practice Horizontal Accountability 0 19 19 0 20 20
Government censorship eﬀort — Media Diagonal Accountability 1 17 16 0 14 14
Executive respects constitution Horizontal Accountability 1 15 14 0 13 13
Freedom of academic and cultural expression Diagonal Accountability 1 14 13 6 6 0
High court independence Horizontal Accountability 2 12 10 0 16 16
Compliance with judiciary Horizontal Accountability 2 11 9 1 11 10
Lower court independence Horizontal Accountability 2 11 9 0 18 18
Compliance with high court Horizontal Accountability 3 11 8 3 8 5
Election other voting irregularities Vertical Accountability 3 11 8 0 20 20
CSO entry and exit Diagonal Accountability 4 11 7 6 7 1
CSO repression Diagonal Accountability 5 10 5 10 4 -6
Freedom of discussion for men Diagonal Accountability 5 9 4 9 4 -5
Freedom of discussion for women Diagonal Accountability 5 8 3 9 5 -4
Media self-censorship Diagonal Accountability 6 7 1 5 7 2
EMB autonomy Vertical Accountability 6 7 1 2 7 5
Media bias Diagonal Accountability 7 6 -1 7 6 -1
Print/broadcast media critical Diagonal Accountability 9 6 -3 10 4 -6
EMB capacity Vertical Accountability 13 4 -9 7 6 -1
CSO participatory environment Diagonal Accountability 13 0 -13 11 4 -7
Election government intimidation Vertical Accountability 15 0 -15 14 2 -12
Election free and fair Vertical Accountability 16 0 -16 8 4 -4
Print/broadcast media perspectives Diagonal Accountability 18 0 -18 18 0 -18
Opposition parties autonomy Vertical Accountability 20 0 -20 17 0 -17
Election voter registry Vertical Accountability 20 0 -20 10 4 -6
Suﬀrage Vertical Accountability 21 0 -21 25 0 -25
Elections multiparty Vertical Accountability 21 0 -21 25 0 -25
Barriers to parties Vertical Accountability 21 0 -21 24 0 -24
Party ban Vertical Accountability 21 0 -21 24 0 -24
Notes: Results from pairwise domination analysis of collapsed “states” in episodes of autocratizing democracy, disaggregated
by levels of democracy stock. Statistics: d= number of indicators dominated; r =number of indicators dominated by; score=
domination score (d-r). Results are sorted from low to high on domination score for episodes with a high democracy stock. Unit
of analysis is the collapsed state.
viii
--- PAGE 40 ---
Table A6. Domination table for Figure 3 and 6 (waves)
Third wave Pre-third wave
Indicator Index d r score d r score
Harassment of journalists Diagonal Accountability 0 22 22 0 24 24
Engaged society Diagonal Accountability 0 21 21 0 24 24
Legislature investigates in practice Horizontal Accountability 0 20 20 0 17 17
Executive oversight Horizontal Accountability 0 20 20 0 24 24
High court independence Horizontal Accountability 0 18 18 3 8 5
Executive respects constitution Horizontal Accountability 0 17 17 3 10 7
Election other voting irregularities Vertical Accountability 0 16 16 7 7 0
Lower court independence Horizontal Accountability 0 16 16 4 8 4
Government censorship eﬀort — Media Diagonal Accountability 0 15 15 0 19 19
Compliance with judiciary Horizontal Accountability 1 13 12 3 9 6
Compliance with high court Horizontal Accountability 2 9 7 4 8 4
CSO entry and exit Diagonal Accountability 4 8 4 0 15 15
EMB autonomy Vertical Accountability 5 8 3 5 8 3
Freedom of academic and cultural expression Diagonal Accountability 4 7 3 0 13 13
Media self-censorship Diagonal Accountability 6 6 0 5 7 2
Media bias Diagonal Accountability 8 6 -2 3 8 5
Freedom of discussion for women Diagonal Accountability 9 5 -4 4 8 4
Print/broadcast media critical Diagonal Accountability 10 5 -5 7 5 -2
Freedom of discussion for men Diagonal Accountability 9 4 -5 6 8 2
CSO repression Diagonal Accountability 10 5 -5 5 8 3
Election free and fair Vertical Accountability 10 4 -6 17 0 -17
EMB capacity Vertical Accountability 10 4 -6 7 5 -2
CSO participatory environment Diagonal Accountability 11 4 -7 8 5 -3
Election government intimidation Vertical Accountability 13 0 -13 20 0 -20
Election voter registry Vertical Accountability 14 0 -14 21 0 -21
Print/broadcast media perspectives Diagonal Accountability 17 0 -17 9 2 -7
Opposition parties autonomy Vertical Accountability 18 0 -18 21 0 -21
Suﬀrage Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 23 0 -23
Elections multiparty Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 23 0 -23
Barriers to parties Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 22 0 -22
Party ban Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 20 0 -20
Notes: Results from pairwise domination analysis of collapsed “states” in episodes of autocratizing democracy, disaggregated by
levels of polarization. Statistics: d= number of indicators dominated; r =number of indicators dominated by; score= domination
score (d-r). Results are sorted from low to high on domination score for episodes in the third wave of autocratization. Unit of
analysis is the collapsed state.
ix
--- PAGE 41 ---
Table A7. Domination table for Figure 3 (democracy stock for the episodes in the third wave
autocratization)
High Stock Low Stock
Indicator Index d r score d r score
Harassment of journalists Diagonal Accountability 0 27 27 0 22 22
Engaged society Diagonal Accountability 0 21 21 0 19 19
Executive respects constitution Horizontal Accountability 0 19 19 0 14 14
Legislature investigates in practice Horizontal Accountability 0 19 19 0 20 20
Executive oversight Horizontal Accountability 1 19 18 0 20 20
High court independence Horizontal Accountability 1 18 17 0 20 20
Election other voting irregularities Vertical Accountability 1 18 17 0 21 21
Government censorship eﬀort — Media Diagonal Accountability 1 16 15 0 15 15
Freedom of academic and cultural expression Diagonal Accountability 1 13 12 7 6 -1
Lower court independence Horizontal Accountability 1 13 12 0 19 19
Compliance with judiciary Horizontal Accountability 2 11 9 1 12 11
Compliance with high court Horizontal Accountability 2 10 8 3 9 6
CSO entry and exit Diagonal Accountability 6 11 5 7 6 -1
Media self-censorship Diagonal Accountability 6 7 1 7 8 1
EMB autonomy Vertical Accountability 7 7 0 4 7 3
CSO repression Diagonal Accountability 8 7 -1 10 5 -5
Freedom of discussion for men Diagonal Accountability 8 6 -2 9 4 -5
Freedom of discussion for women Diagonal Accountability 8 6 -2 9 5 -4
Print/broadcast media critical Diagonal Accountability 10 6 -4 10 5 -5
Media bias Diagonal Accountability 10 6 -4 8 5 -3
Election government intimidation Vertical Accountability 12 5 -7 13 3 -10
Election free and fair Vertical Accountability 13 4 -9 8 4 -4
EMB capacity Vertical Accountability 13 4 -9 9 6 -3
CSO participatory environment Diagonal Accountability 13 0 -13 12 2 -10
Election voter registry Vertical Accountability 16 0 -16 11 4 -7
Opposition parties autonomy Vertical Accountability 20 0 -20 19 0 -19
Party ban Vertical Accountability 22 0 -22 24 0 -24
Print/broadcast media perspectives Diagonal Accountability 22 0 -22 17 0 -17
Suﬀrage Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 25 0 -25
Elections multiparty Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 25 0 -25
Barriers to parties Vertical Accountability 23 0 -23 23 0 -23
Notes: Results from pairwise domination analysis of collapsed “states” in episodes of autocratizing democracy, disaggregated
by levels of democracy stock. Statistics: d= number of indicators dominated; r =number of indicators dominated by; score=
domination score (d-r). Results are sorted from low to high on domination score for episodes with a high democracy stock. Unit
of analysis is the collapsed state.
x
--- PAGE 42 ---
Table A8. Estimating the similarity of domination scores in episodes of autocratizing
democracies with (1) democratic breakdown vs. survival, (2) high vs. low
democracy stock, and (3) before and after the third wave of autocratization
Comparison:
(1) (2) (3)
Outcome Dem. Stock Waves
Coeﬃcient 0.88 ∗∗∗ 0.92∗∗∗ 0.88∗∗∗
(0.08) (0.08) (0.09)
Constant 0.00 0.00 -0.00
(1.20) (1.19) (1.29)
Observations 31 31 31
R2 0.80 0.81 0.77
Adjusted R2 0.79 0.81 0.76
Residual Std. Error (df = 29) 6.66 6.63 7.21
F Statistic (df = 1; 29) 112.98 ∗∗∗ 126.77∗∗∗ 98.25∗∗∗
Notes: Estimated coeﬃcients and standard errors from bivariate linear regression
models. The dependent variable (y) is the domination score for 31 indicators in
autocratizing democracies that (1) have survive, (2) have a high democracy stock,
and (3) occured in the third wave of autocratization. The independent variable (x)
is the domination score for those same 31 indicators in episodes of autocratizing
democracy that (1) have breakdown, (2) have a low democracy stock, and (3) oc-
curred before the third wave of autocratization. Domination scores calculated using
collapsed states. ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
xi
--- PAGE 43 ---
Table A9. Residuals from bivariate regressions reported in Table A8
(1) (2) (3)
Indicator Index Outcome Dem. Stock Waves
Freedom of discussion for men Diagonal Accountability -17.12 8.62 -6.76
Executive oversight Horizontal Accountability -11.35 3.43 -1.17
Legislature investigates in practice Horizontal Accountability -7.70 0.51 5.00
EMB autonomy Vertical Accountability -7.42 -3.62 0.35
Print/broadcast media perspectives Diagonal Accountability -4.96 -1.36 -10.82
Election voter registry Vertical Accountability -4.61 -14.45 4.53
Election other voting irregularities Vertical Accountability -4.50 -10.49 16.00
Party ban Vertical Accountability -3.53 1.19 -5.36
Government censorship eﬀort — Media Diagonal Accountability -3.04 3.06 -1.76
Freedom of discussion for women Diagonal Accountability -3.00 6.70 -7.53
Elections multiparty Vertical Accountability -2.65 2.11 -2.71
Barriers to parties Vertical Accountability -2.65 1.19 -3.59
Opposition parties autonomy Vertical Accountability -2.30 -4.28 0.53
Suﬀrage Vertical Accountability -1.76 2.11 -2.71
CSO participatory environment Diagonal Accountability -0.69 -6.53 -4.35
Lower court independence Horizontal Accountability -0.62 -7.64 12.47
Executive respects constitution Horizontal Accountability -0.62 1.98 10.82
High court independence Horizontal Accountability 0.61 -4.79 13.59
Freedom of academic and cultural expression Diagonal Accountability 1.58 13.00 -8.47
EMB capacity Vertical Accountability 1.65 -8.08 -4.24
CSO entry and exit Diagonal Accountability 1.69 6.08 -9.23
Compliance with judiciary Horizontal Accountability 1.92 -0.25 6.71
Compliance with high court Horizontal Accountability 3.69 3.38 3.47
CSO repression Diagonal Accountability 6.00 10.55 -7.65
Media bias Diagonal Accountability 6.00 -0.08 -6.41
Election government intimidation Vertical Accountability 7.50 -3.91 4.64
Engaged society Diagonal Accountability 7.53 5.51 -0.17
Media self-censorship Diagonal Accountability 7.77 -0.85 -1.76
Harassment of journalists Diagonal Accountability 9.53 6.66 0.83
Print/broadcast media critical Diagonal Accountability 10.31 2.55 -3.24
Election free and fair Vertical Accountability 12.73 -12.30 9.00
Notes: Estimated residuals from bivariate linear regression models of Table A8.
xii
--- PAGE 44 ---
Table A10. Bivariate regressions of domination scores (1) democratic breakdown vs. survival,
(2) high vs. low democracy stock, and (3) before and after the third wave of
autocratization, based on country-year observations
Comparison:
(1) (2) (3)
Outcome Dem. Stock Waves
Coeﬃcients 0.89 ∗∗∗ 0.95∗∗∗ 0.99∗∗∗
(0.09) (0.08) (0.07)
Constant 0.00 0.00 0.00
(1.30) (1.19) (1.03)
Observations 31 31 31
R2 0.77 0.82 0.86
Adjusted R2 0.76 0.81 0.86
Residual Std. Error (df = 29) 7.26 6.60 5.75
F Statistic (df = 1; 29) 96.74 ∗∗∗ 130.27∗∗∗ 178.26∗∗∗
Notes: Estimated coeﬃcients and standard errors from bivariate linear regression
models. The dependent variable (y) is the domination score for 31 indicators in
autocratizing democracies that (1) have survive, (2) have a high democracy stock, and
(3) occured in the third wave of autocratization. The independent variable (x) is the
domination score for those same 31 indicators in episodes of autocratizing democracy
that (1) have breakdown, (2) have a low democracy stock, and (3) occurred before
the third wave of autocratization. Domination scores calculated using country-year
observations. ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
xiii
--- PAGE 45 ---
Table A11. Residuals from bivariate regressions reported in Table A10
(1) (2) (3)
Indicator Index Outcome Dem. Stock Waves
Freedom of discussion for men Diagonal Accountability -17.11 8.82 -5.01
Freedom of discussion for women Diagonal Accountability -17.00 7.82 -5.98
Executive oversight Horizontal Accountability -8.40 2.87 -3.75
Legislature investigates in practice Horizontal Accountability -7.51 -0.09 2.19
Election other voting irregularities Vertical Accountability -6.30 -11.09 12.04
Election voter registry Vertical Accountability -5.58 -13.27 0.83
Print/broadcast media perspectives Diagonal Accountability -4.92 -0.82 -3.15
Party ban Vertical Accountability -2.49 1.95 -3.21
EMB capacity Vertical Accountability -2.45 -8.09 -7.01
EMB autonomy Vertical Accountability -2.43 -3.77 -1.95
Government censorship eﬀort — Media Diagonal Accountability -2.19 4.59 -0.83
Opposition parties autonomy Vertical Accountability -2.15 -4.73 -0.19
CSO participatory environment Diagonal Accountability -1.79 -4.46 -1.06
Suﬀrage Vertical Accountability -1.60 1.91 -1.23
Elections multiparty Vertical Accountability -1.60 1.91 -1.23
Barriers to parties Vertical Accountability -1.60 0.95 -2.22
High court independence Horizontal Accountability 0.58 -5.27 12.06
Freedom of academic and cultural expression Diagonal Accountability 0.79 13.05 -7.89
Executive respects constitution Horizontal Accountability 1.24 1.55 10.07
Lower court independence Horizontal Accountability 1.36 -6.27 10.06
Compliance with judiciary Horizontal Accountability 3.90 0.46 7.06
Engaged society Diagonal Accountability 4.15 6.77 -2.75
Election government intimidation Vertical Accountability 4.42 -2.64 2.82
CSO entry and exit Diagonal Accountability 5.68 6.14 -4.89
Compliance with high court Horizontal Accountability 6.57 2.27 3.06
Harassment of journalists Diagonal Accountability 6.83 5.05 -1.75
Media bias Diagonal Accountability 7.00 -0.05 -7.94
Media self-censorship Diagonal Accountability 8.77 -3.82 1.01
CSO repression Diagonal Accountability 10.77 11.73 -4.99
Print/broadcast media critical Diagonal Accountability 11.32 -1.27 -1.04
Election free and fair Vertical Accountability 11.76 -12.18 6.85
Notes: Estimated residuals from bivariate linear regression models of Table A10.
xiv
--- PAGE 46 ---
Table A12. Domination table for country-year observations by groups of episodes
Outcome Democracy Stock Waves
Breakdown Survival Low High Pre-third Third
Indicator d r score d r score d r score d r score d r score d r score
Harassment of journalists 0 25 25 0 29 29 0 23 23 0 27 27 0 24 24 0 22 22
Executive oversight 0 23 23 1 13 12 0 19 19 0 21 21 0 24 24 0 20 20
Legislature investigates in practice 0 22 22 1 13 12 0 20 20 0 19 19 0 18 18 0 20 20
Engaged society 0 19 19 0 21 21 0 17 17 0 23 23 0 24 24 0 21 21
Government censorship eﬀort — Media 0 16 16 1 13 12 0 13 13 1 18 17 0 16 16 0 15 15
Election other voting irregularities 1 16 15 2 9 7 0 20 20 3 11 8 5 9 4 0 16 16
High court independence 1 15 14 1 14 13 0 16 16 2 12 10 3 9 6 0 18 18
Lower court independence 1 13 12 1 13 12 0 16 16 2 11 9 3 9 6 0 16 16
Executive respects constitution 1 12 11 1 12 11 1 13 12 1 14 13 3 10 7 0 17 17
Compliance with judiciary 3 11 8 2 13 11 1 11 10 2 12 10 3 9 6 1 14 13
Freedom of academic and cultural expression 3 10 7 2 9 7 5 6 1 1 15 14 0 11 11 4 7 3
CSO entry and exit 3 9 6 1 12 11 4 7 3 3 12 9 0 11 11 4 10 6
EMB autonomy 4 9 5 8 10 2 2 7 5 6 7 1 4 9 5 5 8 3
Compliance with high court 4 9 5 2 13 11 2 8 6 3 11 8 3 9 6 2 11 9
Freedom of discussion for women 6 6 0 17 0 -17 9 5 -4 5 9 4 5 7 2 9 5 -4
Media bias 5 5 0 2 9 7 7 6 -1 7 6 -1 3 9 6 8 6 -2
Freedom of discussion for men 7 6 -1 18 0 -18 8 4 -4 5 10 5 5 4 -1 10 4 -6
CSO repression 8 6 -2 1 10 9 10 4 -6 5 11 6 5 6 1 10 6 -4
Media self-censorship 7 5 -2 2 9 7 4 8 4 7 7 0 4 5 1 6 8 2
EMB capacity 8 4 -4 12 6 -6 7 5 -2 13 3 -10 5 4 -1 12 4 -8
Print/broadcast media critical 10 4 -6 3 9 6 10 4 -6 12 5 -7 7 3 -4 10 5 -5
CSO participatory environment 11 4 -7 12 4 -8 12 2 -10 14 0 -14 8 2 -6 11 4 -7
Election free and fair 14 3 -11 3 5 2 8 4 -4 16 0 -16 15 0 -15 12 4 -8
Election government intimidation 14 0 -14 12 4 -8 14 0 -14 16 0 -16 17 0 -17 14 0 -14
Election voter registry 14 0 -14 18 0 -18 10 4 -6 19 0 -19 16 0 -16 15 0 -15
Print/broadcast media perspectives 17 0 -17 20 0 -20 18 0 -18 18 0 -18 15 0 -15 18 0 -18
Opposition parties autonomy 19 0 -19 19 0 -19 16 0 -16 20 0 -20 18 0 -18 18 0 -18
Party ban 22 0 -22 22 0 -22 23 0 -23 20 0 -20 20 0 -20 23 0 -23
Suﬀrage 23 0 -23 22 0 -22 24 0 -24 21 0 -21 22 0 -22 23 0 -23
Elections multiparty 23 0 -23 22 0 -22 24 0 -24 21 0 -21 22 0 -22 23 0 -23
Barriers to parties 23 0 -23 22 0 -22 23 0 -23 21 0 -21 21 0 -21 23 0 -23
Notes: Results from pariwise domination analysis in episodes of autocratizing democracy, disaggregated by outicome type, levels of democracy stock or polarization.
Statistics: d= number of indicators dominated; r =number of indicators dominated by; score= domination score (d-r). Results are sorted from low to high on domination
score for episodes with democratic breakdown. Unit of analysis is country-year.
xv
--- PAGE 47 ---
Table A13. Bivariate regression of domination scores with (1) democratic breakdown vs.
survival, (2) high vs. low democracy stock, and (3) Before and After the third of
autocratization using two-thirds threshold
Comparison:
(1) (2) (3)
Outcome Dem. Stock Waves
Coeﬃcient 0.92 ∗∗∗ 0.97∗∗∗ 0.99∗∗∗
(0.08) (0.07) (0.07)
Constant 0.00 -0.00 0.00
(0.87) (0.77) (0.65)
Observations 31 31 31
R2 0.81 0.86 0.88
Adjusted R2 0.80 0.85 0.88
Residual Std. Error (df = 29) 4.87 4.27 3.64
F Statistic (df = 1; 29) 122.95 ∗∗∗ 176.53∗∗∗ 216.74∗∗∗
Notes: Estimated coeﬃcients and standard errors from bivariate linear regression
models. The dependent variable (y) is the domination score for 31 indicators in
autocratizing democracies that (1) have survive, (2) have a high democracy stock, and
(3) occurred in the third wave of autocratization. The independent variable (x) is the
domination score for those same 31 indicators in episodes of autocratizing democracy
that (1) have breakdown, (2) have a low democracy stock, and (3) occurred before the
third wave of autocratization. Domination scores calculated using collapsed states
with a threshold of at least two-thirds for domination. ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
xvi
--- PAGE 48 ---
Table A14. Residuals from bivariate regressions reported in Table A13
(1) (2) (3)
Indicator Index Outcome Dem. Stock Waves
Freedom of discussion for men Diagonal Accountability -14.92 4.92 -3.99
Print/broadcast media perspectives Diagonal Accountability -8.72 -2.28 -7.05
Executive oversight Horizontal Accountability -6.81 4.25 1.14
Opposition parties autonomy Vertical Accountability -5.95 -2.36 0.82
Freedom of discussion for women Diagonal Accountability -4.76 3.03 -3.94
EMB autonomy Vertical Accountability -4.68 -2.89 3.01
Legislature investigates in practice Horizontal Accountability -4.05 -0.67 3.10
Election other voting irregularities Vertical Accountability -2.28 -4.70 8.00
Barriers to parties Vertical Accountability -1.51 1.42 -4.18
Party ban Vertical Accountability -1.51 5.42 -2.18
Lower court independence Horizontal Accountability -0.28 -1.78 3.08
Suﬀrage Vertical Accountability 0.33 2.39 -0.24
Elections multiparty Vertical Accountability 0.33 1.42 2.74
Executive respects constitution Horizontal Accountability 0.64 3.19 2.09
Government censorship eﬀort — Media Diagonal Accountability 0.64 4.19 -1.87
Freedom of academic and cultural expression Diagonal Accountability 1.32 6.11 -3.91
Compliance with high court Horizontal Accountability 1.40 1.14 0.08
Compliance with judiciary Horizontal Accountability 1.48 0.17 0.09
CSO participatory environment Diagonal Accountability 1.68 -4.08 -4.01
High court independence Horizontal Accountability 1.72 1.22 6.05
CSO repression Diagonal Accountability 2.24 0.06 0.01
CSO entry and exit Diagonal Accountability 2.40 3.14 -2.90
EMB capacity Vertical Accountability 2.92 -8.89 -5.01
Election voter registry Vertical Accountability 3.20 -7.19 -0.13
Harassment of journalists Diagonal Accountability 3.35 6.44 5.16
Media bias Diagonal Accountability 4.08 1.06 -1.95
Media self-censorship Diagonal Accountability 4.08 -2.89 3.00
Engaged society Diagonal Accountability 4.11 1.39 -3.74
Election government intimidation Vertical Accountability 5.28 0.75 1.86
Print/broadcast media critical Diagonal Accountability 5.84 -4.00 1.96
Election free and fair Vertical Accountability 8.44 -9.97 2.90
Notes: Estimated residuals from bivariate linear regression models of Table A13.
xvii
--- PAGE 49 ---
Table A15. Domination table by groups of episodes using two-third threshold
Outcome Democracy Stock Waves
Breakdown Survival Low High Pre-third Third
Indicator d r score d r score d r score d r score d r score d r score
Harassment of journalists 0 17 17 0 19 19 0 16 16 0 22 22 0 13 13 0 18 18
Executive oversight 0 15 15 0 7 7 0 9 9 0 13 13 0 11 11 0 12 12
Engaged society 0 14 14 0 17 17 0 14 14 0 15 15 0 21 21 0 17 17
Legislature investigates in practice 0 12 12 0 7 7 0 12 12 0 11 11 0 8 8 0 11 11
Election other voting irregularities 0 9 9 1 7 6 0 11 11 1 7 6 2 2 0 0 8 8
High court independence 0 9 9 0 10 10 0 8 8 0 9 9 1 5 4 0 10 10
Lower court independence 0 9 9 0 8 8 0 8 8 1 7 6 1 7 6 0 9 9
Executive respects constitution 0 8 8 0 8 8 0 7 7 0 10 10 1 8 7 0 9 9
Government censorship eﬀort — Media 0 8 8 0 8 8 0 7 7 0 11 11 0 10 10 0 8 8
Compliance with judiciary 0 6 6 0 7 7 0 6 6 1 7 6 0 7 7 0 7 7
CSO entry and exit 0 5 5 0 7 7 0 5 5 0 8 8 0 8 8 0 5 5
Compliance with high court 0 5 5 0 6 6 0 5 5 1 7 6 1 7 6 0 6 6
Freedom of academic and cultural expression 0 4 4 2 7 5 0 4 4 0 10 10 0 7 7 1 4 3
EMB autonomy 0 4 4 1 0 -1 0 4 4 2 3 1 1 2 1 0 4 4
Freedom of discussion for women 1 4 3 2 0 -2 3 4 1 1 5 4 0 5 5 2 3 1
CSO repression 1 4 3 1 6 5 2 4 2 1 3 2 1 2 1 2 3 1
Freedom of discussion for men 2 3 1 14 0 -14 4 1 -3 1 3 2 0 1 1 3 0 -3
Media bias 3 4 1 2 7 5 2 4 2 3 6 3 1 5 4 2 4 2
Media self-censorship 3 4 1 2 7 5 1 5 4 2 3 1 2 2 0 2 5 3
EMB capacity 4 3 -1 2 4 2 0 4 4 5 0 -5 3 2 -1 6 0 -6
Print/broadcast media critical 4 2 -2 2 6 4 4 4 0 4 0 -4 4 1 -3 2 1 -1
CSO participatory environment 4 0 -4 2 0 -2 3 0 -3 7 0 -7 1 0 -1 5 0 -5
Election free and fair 7 0 -7 2 4 2 3 4 1 9 0 -9 8 0 -8 5 0 -5
Election government intimidation 9 0 -9 3 0 -3 9 0 -9 8 0 -8 11 0 -11 9 0 -9
Print/broadcast media perspectives 9 0 -9 17 0 -17 10 0 -10 12 0 -12 4 0 -4 11 0 -11
Election voter registry 10 0 -10 6 0 -6 7 0 -7 14 0 -14 10 0 -10 10 0 -10
Opposition parties autonomy 12 0 -12 17 0 -17 13 0 -13 15 0 -15 14 0 -14 13 0 -13
Barriers to parties 19 0 -19 19 0 -19 21 0 -21 19 0 -19 14 0 -14 18 0 -18
Party ban 19 0 -19 19 0 -19 21 0 -21 15 0 -15 14 0 -14 16 0 -16
Suﬀrage 21 0 -21 19 0 -19 22 0 -22 19 0 -19 19 0 -19 19 0 -19
Elections multiparty 21 0 -21 19 0 -19 21 0 -21 19 0 -19 21 0 -21 18 0 -18
Notes: Results from pariwise domination analysis in episodes of autocratizing democracy, disaggregated by outicome type, levels of democracy stock or polarization.
Statistics: d= number of indicators dominated; r =number of indicators dominated by; score= domination score (d-r). Results are sorted from low to high on domination
score for episodes with democratic breakdown. Domination calculated using a threshold of at least two-third.
xviii